Introduction
other person smiled and said, “Whoops. I better be careful what I say so you
won’t be analyzing me.” Mary’s response was that she was not a clinical psychologist, but an experimental psychologist working on aspects of language acquisition in chimpanzees.
It is of more than passing interest to know that many people who hear the
word psychologist assume that the person so identified is a clinical psychologist.
Many people use variations of the term psychology to denote motivation (“I am
really psyched for that date”), readiness (“I am psyched for that exam”), intimidation (“I really psyched him out”), or a person who appears to be out of touch
with reality or with societal norms (“That guy is really psycho”). The range of
psychology applications and practice is discussed in Chapter 2. In this introductory chapter, we discuss the history and development of clinical psychology as
a practice, a science, and a treatment; and we place clinical psychology in perspective relative to the historical, social, gender, cultural, and scientific environments from which it emerged.
Writing a text such as this one takes a great deal of thought and discussion
among the authors. We have had to decide what to include, what to exclude,
and how to present the material in as scientific, readable, and useful way as
possible. We have, between us, over a century of experience, first as students
and then as university faculty members and practitioners. We are aware of the
challenges in developing a text. Will it hold your interest? Will it allow your instructor to elaborate on the ideas we present? Will it provide the requisite information? The latter two points are in fact relatively easy to fulfill. To keep
you interested is a much harder job. For this reason, we have decided to talk to
you directly and to think of you as one of our students.
The clinical psychologist, in the simplest definition, works in a clinical setting, with clinical populations, and uses clinical interventions. But what does that
mean? Clinics are usually for people needing treatment of one sort or another. A
look at a hospital directory might list the hours of operation for the spine clinic,
the asthma clinic, the well-baby clinic, or the mood clinic. That is where you
would expect to find clinical psychologists. Although this has been true for much
of the existence of clinical psychology, the appellation of clinical has now been affixed to other terms such as clinical health psychology, clinical child psychology,
or clinical neuropsychology.
The notion that people have emotional problems is not new. That some
people act unacceptably within their social or family group and are thought to
be deviant from their fellows is, instead, an ancient belief. Rather than dazing
(or amazing) you with the historical or prehistorical experience of psychology,
we have decided to make it easy.
We are going to take you for a ride on an incredible magic carpet. Not
only can it fly though the air, it allows you to board without going through a
metal detector. Second, it can travel through time so that we can view many
experiences, circumstances, and situations. Third, it renders us invisible so that
we can observe others and not be seen. Fourth, it is soundproof so that we can
discuss what we are seeing without being heard. Fifth, if, for any reason, our
trip is interrupted, you can climb aboard again and take up where you left off.
Sixth, this magic carpet has a universal translator that allows us to listen in to
what is going on in front of us. Finally, it will safely return us to our starting
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 5
point. Please note that no snacks will be served on this flight so before embarking, collect your favorite snacks to take along.
A Flying Carpet Tour of Clinical Psychology
If you are safely aboard, our first stop is prehistory. We can feel the heat. We
are on a plain in Africa. A formerly social and well-adjusted member of the
tribe has been howling at the moon, attacking other members of the tribe, and
having uncontrolled seizures or other acts against the best interest of the tribe,
clan, or group. He has been caught and subdued by other members of the tribe
and has been rendered unconscious by being forced to drink a potion the tribal
healer has concocted from herbs and flowers. The healer is about to perform a
surgical procedure still used today, called trephining. She is using sharpened
flints to bore a hole in the person’s skull to release the demons and spirits that
have been trapped there. Releasing the demons should relieve the patient of
their “possession.”
Although we might expect the patient to die from what we see as a barbaric operation, skulls dating back thousands of years have been found with
holes drilled in the skull, and the regrowth of bone indicates that the person
survived. Scientists think that the holes were drilled to release demons that inhabited the individual causing aberrant behavior. In other cases, the clan healer
might simply offer potions made from roots, barks, or leaves of plants as prescriptions for various disorders. Some combinations of drugs calmed the angry
patient, and others likely energized the inactive individual. What we now call
“folk” remedies were the earliest attempts at dealing with the broad range of illnesses, including those that we now label as psychological disorders. If we listen
carefully, we might hear the healer give the man’s wife a bag of herbs and
leaves, and instruct her to brew a tea with them when the man awakens from
his surgery.
If you will hold on tight, we are going to move on to ancient Greece. Before we fly into the office of a healer, there are some things that you need to
know. The Greeks posited that there were four basic elements; fire, water,
earth, and air. As all persons were constructed of these elements, their balance
within the body was of major importance. Each element would correspond
with a particular characteristic that would create a humor within the body: fire
= blood humor; earth = black bile humor; water = yellow bile humor, and air =
phlegm humor. Fire, of course, was hot. Water was wet. Earth was dry, and air
was cold. The particular humoral mix could be seen in the person’s personality
and behavioral style. These ideas seem quaint to us today, but we still refer back
to them. An angry person is said to be “hot-blooded” or to have a “fiery temper.” The old term for depression, melancholy, stems from the terms melan
(black, as in melanin) and choli (bile, as in colon). Melan + Coli = melancholy.
We may describe someone as phlegmatic, meaning “subdued.”
In the quarters of the ancient Greek healer, we have an opportunity to
watch a treatment. The healer is assessing the patient’s humoral mix and will
then prescribe a treatment. The patient reports that he is often angry, and the
6 Introduction
anger involves him in physical fights with family, friends, and even strangers.
The healer is recommending bloodletting as the treatment of choice to lower the
force of the blood humor that is obviously creating the problem. The patient lies
on a couch and the healer cuts into the patient’s arm and blood flows copiously
into a bowl held by the healer’s assistant. When the healer has seen enough
blood flow, she will stanch the bleeding with folded linen and pressure. The patient will then rest. Other treatments might include enemas to relieve the excess of black bile, forced purging or the use of emetics for yellow bile, or
compression of the chest for too much air.
If you found that scene a bit unpleasant, be forewarned that the next stop
may be even more visceral. We are now in medieval France. We are flying over a
walled town, and in the middle of the town square workers are preparing for an
execution. They are piling branches and wood around a stone column. Set high
in the column is an iron ring. We are all thinking the same thing. They are planning on burning someone to death. There, off to the right we can see a woman
being dragged toward the post. We can hear the charges against her being read.
Fortunately our carpet allows us to understand medieval French. The
prisoner was found guilty of practicing the black arts, witchcraft. The court, a
church court it seems, has sentenced her and two other women to be burned as
witches. Her hands are tied to the iron ring and her feet secured. She is gagged
so she cannot say anything or cast a spell. A torch is lit. I think it is time for us
to leave this place.
In the Middle Ages, the church developed as an arbiter of both what is
normal and what is abnormal, and then offered “cures” for the abnormal behavior. These cures ranged from prayer and meditation to exorcism and execution.
The inquisition brought with it the beating, flogging, burning, hanging, and
drowning of those suspected of trafficking in the black arts. Interestingly, those
black arts included healing and midwifery. If a town was unfortunate enough
to have a disease manifestation such as the plague, it was considered the work
of witches. Only a concerted search for the witches and their immediate eradication could cleanse and heal the community.
Our next stop is going to be the seventeenth-century town of Salem,
Massachusetts. We think that you know what we will find. We are in a courtroom. As you can see, everyone is dressed just like the Pilgrims in the pictures
of the first Thanksgiving. This, however, is no celebration. A woman is
dragged into the courtroom and brought before the two judges. The charges
against her involve witchcraft. The accusers are three teenage girls who report having seen the woman muttering “spells” and having a conversation
with her cat. Some of the woman’s neighbors testify that they, too, saw her
“acting strangely,” though other townspeople testify that she is a harmless
person who caused no problems for anyone.
At that moment, we see something incredible. The teenage accusers fall to
the floor of the courtroom and seem to be having spasms and convulsions. They
point to the woman as they are doing it. Amazingly, the girls’ behavior is entered as “evidence” against the woman and she is pronounced a witch and sentenced to burn. We would later learn of the death of several women based on
the report of these teenage girls. Interestingly, when it was decided to stop
using the girls’ behavior as evidence, the girls’ spasms ceased.
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 7
Our next stop on this magic carpet is outside Paris on a sunny Sunday afternoon. The year is about 1785. It is before the French Revolution, and the
wealthy and elite of Paris are obvious. We can see carriages arriving, and welldressed men and women are emerging from the carriages. It seems that their
destination is a mental hospital called Salpetriére. The visitors do not seem intent
on seeing a relative who might be residing in this particular hospital, but rather
they are strolling along and viewing the inmates as if visiting a zoo. We can see
some inmates posed in postures that they seem to hold for exceedingly long periods. Other inmates are playing with pieces of wood. A woman is cradling a rag
as if it were a baby. The onlookers delicately cover their noses with perfumed
handkerchiefs to block the odor coming from feces-encrusted inmates, rotting
food, and inadequate hygiene facilities. Servants are setting a picnic lunch for
some of the sightseers . . . far away from the hospital building.
A quick trip over the English Channel takes us to an English hospital for
lunatics: St. Mary Bethlehem, also known as the Bethlem Royal Hospital.
Coming from within the walls of this building we hear the rumble of human
voices. Some are shouting, some are crying, and some are making noises that
we cannot interpret. When we hear the cacophony, we think that this place
sounds as if it is out of control. It seems to exist without any sense of order.
There is confusion and uproar everywhere. It is, in fact, pure bedlam—a contraction of the hospital’s name still used to denote what we are witnessing.
Bedlam is the uncontrolled and confusing events and actions we see in the
midst of crises. We see visitors touring the hospital who, like their Parisian
counterparts, are laughing and mocking the residents. Some are even carrying
long poles to prod the patients and make them angry within their cages so that
they will react with outrage and produce a better “show.” The guardians of
these patients do nothing to protect their charges.
We fly back to eighteenth-century Paris and stop at the salon of a physician, Dr. Franz Anton Mesmer. He was born in 1734 and died in 1815. He was
credited by some as having accidentally discovered the idea of group therapy.
Mesmer argued that health or illness was a result of the harmony or discord between the bodily fluids and the planets (e.g., “lunacy” was a result of the gravitational pull of the moon). He later redefined his theory and suggested that
harmony or discord within the individual was a result of some distortion of the
internal magnetic fields.
Let’s observe Mesmer at work. Several patients are sitting around an oak
tub, and the “magnetic fluid” is sending magnetic forces through iron bars
that patients are holding as extensions from the tub. Mesmer is walking
around and speaking soothingly and quietly to the patients. He lays his hands
on them and evaluates the balance of their magnetic fluid. Some of the patients in his treatments appear to faint or swoon and others seem to sit transfixed during their treatment. We would later learn that in the spirit of the
time, scientific support was deemed to be the mark of any treatment. After an
investigation by the Paris Academy of Sciences, Mesmer’s model of treatment
was found to be without merit and the academy would not support it. Although Mesmer later died in obscurity, his name lingers far beyond his treatment to describe someone who is mesmerized as being fixed on an object or in
a trancelike state.
8 Introduction
We now fly ahead to Vienna in the early twentieth century, where a
young neurologist has been building quite a reputation for himself. Dr. Sigmund Freud, frustrated at not getting the faculty appointment that he so
badly wanted in the Department of Neurology at the University of Vienna, is
about to give a lecture. He has abandoned his academic quest and has started
a practice to treat patients who have what he calls “nervous disorders.” Freud
has not yet come to the podium and we can hear comments and discussion by
members of the audience. “I’m aghast at some of the things that I heard about
him,” commented a lawyer. “Well, he writes rather nicely, but some of his
statements are a bit, how shall I say this? Over the edge,” responded an
accountant sitting nearby. A businessman commented, “His work is unsavory,
at the least.” A fourth commented, “Well, he is one of us, so we should listen
respectfully.”
Freud comes to the stage and is introduced as the speaker of the evening.
The president of the Vienna lodge of B’nai B’rith, a group of Jewish professionals, presents Freud and his topic: The Interpretation of Dreams. We can only wonder what Freud has done or said to make it so difficult for him to get a hearing
on this subject from his medical colleagues. He has sought to go to the people
for this presentation. The group listens to his presentation, but by the shakes of
their heads, and the shared smiles, they are finding his presentation of dreams
as the “royal road to the unconscious” a bit much.
Let’s get back on our carpet and take a quick trip forward. World War I
has broken out, and we are in an army recruitment center in 1917. Recruits are
being given a test to determine their abilities and aptitude. The results of the
tests will help in placing the soldiers where the military can gain the greatest
value from their contributions. Two officers are discussing the testing program.
“Darn shame this test. What they need to do is fight. Just courage and a gun is
what they need. They’ll do what we tell them to do just like before, and heaven
help them that doesn’t do what we tell them.” The second officer responds that
he had experiences in Cuba some 20 years earlier with soldiers who appeared
to understand instructions, but were later killed. “We need to build a core of
competent, intelligent soldiers and more intelligent officers. Maybe this way of
selecting them will make a difference.”
The second officer does not know how prophetic he is. Binet’s work will
be the basis for the Army Alpha and the Army Beta tests in years to come. The
Army Alpha and Beta tests were standardized measures for screening large
numbers of people to optimize recruit placement. These tests identified aptitudes and skills to determine which positions in the military would be suitable
for an able recruit. Each test served the same purpose, but the Beta test could
be administered to individuals who did not speak English as a primary language. The fact that all individuals could be examined with these assessments
became significant not only for military recruiting purposes at the time but also
for clinical applications after the war.
Hold on. We leave again and head for England. It is 1938 and we are observing an old man speaking into an early wire recording machine. He speaks
slowly and deliberately because of the prosthesis in his mouth. His speech is
somewhat muffled but we can make out his English. It is Sigmund Freud
speaking of his career:
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 9
I started my professional activities as a neurologist trying to bring relief to my neurotic patients. Under the influence of an older friend [Josef Breuer] and by my own
efforts I discovered some important new facts about the unconscious, insight, the
role of instinctual urges, and so on. Using these new findings, I developed a new
science, psychoanalysis, a branch of psychology as a new method for the treatment
of the neurosis. I had to pay heavily for this bit of good luck. People did not believe
in my facts and thought my theories unsavory. In the end I succeeded in acquiring
pupils and bringing up an international psychoanalytic association. But the struggle is not yet over.
He stops for a moment and then says, “Sigmund Freud.” We know that
he died of cancer the following year. It must make us thoughtful that by his
own words, Freud saw psychoanalysis as part of what we would call clinical
psychology.
Next we travel to the United States. It is 1944, and we are looking in on a
military strategy meeting at the Pentagon in Washington, DC. The Army is pondering what to do about World War II soldiers suffering from combat fatigue.
(In World War I, it was called shellshock.) “We need to be able to do something
with these boys,” declares a colonel. Wearing the insignia of the medical corps,
he argues for more psychiatrists for both field hospital work and behind the
lines. The brigadier general asserts, “If they are doctors, we need them to be
cutting and patching these kids up to save their lives. I am less worried about
their mental health if they have shrapnel in their gut.” A major tentatively
raises his hand. “What about the possibility of using psychologists to deal with
the psychological problems? They are not physicians but they have studied
about helping people with psychological problems.” “Where would we find
them?” asked the colonel. “I can contact several universities and see who might
be available,” replied the major. “Do it,” commands the general.
Our next stop is at a coffeehouse in Witwatersrand, South Africa. It is the
early 1950s. A young psychiatrist is discussing an idea with another colleague.
“It seems obvious. If patients are anxious, they have great difficulty being relaxed. If they are relaxed it is hard to be anxious. What if we can teach anxious
patients to relax? Wouldn’t that ease their problem?” His colleague shook his
head. “Dr. Wolpe, don’t be foolish! You are a trained psychoanalyst. You know
that the anxiety is a symptom of the underlying conflicts. Sure, we can remove
the anxiety for a moment or two, but it will return. Even if we help to remove
the anxiety about one situation, it will only return in another symptom. Besides, the complexity of the anxiety disorders cannot be explained in so simple a
paradigm.” We can only smile knowing the enormous impact that Joseph Wolpe
had on his generations of students and thereby on millions of anxious patients.
Back to the Future
At this point, we come back and land our magic carpet. The rest of the history of
clinical psychology belongs in today’s world. The associations, organizations, divisions, meetings, certifying bodies, and philosophies of practice are contemporary.
10 Introduction
Yet in the practices, publications, and missions of these institutions, we see the
historical influence of the people, events, and scientific eras that have shaped the
field of clinical psychology.
Major Organizations Concerned with Scientific Practice
Major organizational bodies relevant to the professional culture of clinical psychology include the American Board of Professional Psychology (ABPP), the
American Psychological Association (APA), and the Association for Behavioral
and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT). Each of these organizations has specialty subdivisions that reflect the growing complexity of clinical psychology. Established
in 1948, the American Board of Examiners in Professional Psychology (now
shortened to American Board of Professional Psychology), offers advanced certification of competency in a subspecialty of clinical psychology. These specialties include clinical psychology, clinical child and adolescent psychology, and
clinical neuropsychology.
Founded in 1892, the American Psychological Association (APA) is the
largest worldwide association of psychologists. With approximately 150,000
members, the APA offers a vast number of programs and initiatives, including
56 numbered divisions or special interest groups that focus on particular topics. Clinical psychologists are often affiliated with the following APA divisions:
Clinical Psychology (12), Psychotherapy (29), Psychoanalysis (39), Psychologists in Independent Practice (42), and Society of Clinical Child and Adolescent
Psychology (53). There are many other divisions that the clinical psychologist
might be interested in joining. For additional information, see www.apa.org.
APA Division 12—Clinical Psychology
APA members who belong to this division are active in practice, research,
teaching, administration, and study in the field of clinical psychology. Graduate
students in APA approved or regionally accredited doctoral programs may become student affiliates. Members and student affiliates may also join one or
more sections of the division: Section II: Clinical Geropsychology; Section III:
The Society for a Science of Clinical Psychology; Section IV: Clinical Psychology
of Women; Section VI: Clinical Psychology of Ethnic Minorities; Section VII:
Emergencies and Crises; Section VIII: Association of Psychologists in Academic
Health Centers (APAHC); Section IX: Assessment; and Section X: Graduate Students and Early Career Psychologists.
APA Division 29—Psychotherapy
APA members who also belong to this division share in fostering collegial relations among APA members who are interested in psychotherapy. This division
stimulates the exchange of information about psychotherapy, encourages the
evaluation and development of the practice of psychotherapy, educates the
public about the service of psychotherapists, and promotes the general objectives of the APA.
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 11
APA Division 39—Psychoanalysis
This division encompasses the diversity and richness of psychoanalytic theory,
research, and clinical practice. The nine sections within Division 39 represent
members’ broad interests: (I) Psychologists-Psychoanalyst Practitioners; (II)
Childhood and Adolescence; (III) Women, Gender, and Psychoanalysis; (IV)
Local Chapters; (V) Psychologist-Psychoanalysts’ Clinicians; (VI) Psychoanalytic Research Society; (VII) Psychoanalysis and Groups; (VIII) Section on Family Therapy; and (IX) Psychoanalysis of Social Responsibility.
APA Division 42—Psychologists in Independent Practice
This APA membership division deals with psychological services in all independent practice settings and advocates on behalf of consumers of these services.
Through its committees and task forces, it promotes quality and accessibility.
The division also provides a forum for issues affecting independent practice at
the APA convention and at the annual Practice Development Conference.
APA Division 53—Society of Clinical Child and
Adolescent Psychology
This group of APA represents psychologists who are active in teaching, research, clinical services, administration, and advocacy in clinical child psychology. The division has established research and professional service
awards, including an annual student research award and also sponsors publications describing graduate programs and clinical internships that provide
specialized training in clinical child psychology. The division also supports
task forces on the development and evaluation of evidence-based treatments
for childhood disorders and coordinates efforts for dissemination of information about evidence-based services.
Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies
The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT; formerly the
Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy) was founded in 1966. The
founders were among the elite of behavior therapy, but many mainstream psychologists considered the ABCT to be a radical splinter group.
Although ABCT draws members from various mental health disciplines
(psychiatry, social work, psychiatric nursing, counseling), the bulk of the approximately 5,000 member organization comprises clinical psychologists who
share a fundamental interest in integrating science and practice. Their mission
is to relieve human suffering by designing, testing, developing, and disseminating culturally sensitive methods that work, based on the latest scientific advancements (www.abct.org). Advancement of empirically based practice was
the original momentum for the founding of this organization. Over time, scientific developments have led this group toward focusing on cognitive innovations and discoveries, and the name of the organization was officially changed
in 2004. Because cognitive-behavior therapy is based on broad principles of
human learning and adaptation, it can accomplish a wide variety of goals. The
12 Introduction
therapy has been applied to issues ranging from depression and anxiety to the
improvement of parenting, relationships, and personal effectiveness.
Training Philosophy in Clinical Psychology
In 1949, at the request of the newly formed Committee on Accreditation of
APA, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) sponsored a conference
in Boulder, Colorado, to discuss the development of standards for training in
clinical psychology. This conference was, in effect, a step in the government’s
initiative to tap the resources of psychology for the WWII effort, circa 1944
Washington, DC. Although some clinical psychology training programs were
in existence at the time, the content, length, format, requirements, and missions varied. All the programs were housed in university departments, but
some were in graduate schools of arts and science and others were in schools
of education.
The government connection was a boon to the development of clinical
psychology. The Veterans Administration (VA) and the NIMH offered training
funds for internship sites. The ideas and protocols developed at the Boulder
conference became known as the “Boulder Model” for clinical training.
The participants at the conference agreed that the minimal training must include a PhD, thereby placing psychologists squarely in the midst of their academic colleagues in other disciplines. Psychologists were to be scientists and
therefore would be trained to be competent in research as well as the development of clinical skills and competencies. This dual emphasis resulted in the
notion of the clinical psychologist being educated and trained as a scientistpractitioner.
The Boulder conference established the following parameters for doctoral
training in clinical psychology:
• Boulder-model programs in clinical psychology award the PhD degree.
• The appropriate location for clinical psychology training is a university department, usually in a faculty of arts and science, not in a separate school
that is part of a university (e.g., law, medicine, dentistry) or in a freestanding school (e.g., many schools of medicine).
• The program can be one of several programs within an academic
department.
• Clinical psychologists are to be prepared for work in both the academic
world and the practice world.
• The APA Committee on Accreditation provides an approval and accreditation for training programs in clinical psychology. The accreditation process, though meticulous and sometimes arduous to complete, has made
the designation “APA accredited” the gold standard for clinical psychology
programs.
• The PhD programs require a research-based dissertation as a requirement
for the completion of the degree.
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 13
• To provide maximum funding through grants, fellowships, and scholarships, small numbers of carefully selected students are admitted.
• Limiting the number of students facilitates maximum mentorship of
students, as the goal is successful training of every student accepted for
admission.
The scientist-practitioner model was questioned by many practicing clinicians. As early as the 1960s, the scientist-practitioner emphasis was under
scrutiny. As an alternative approach to training, the California School of Professional Psychology was founded by Dr. Nicholas Cummings in 1969. Cummings, a former president of APA and a behavioral science entrepreneur,
worked with the California State Psychological Association to develop a PhD
program that more strongly emphasized the applied clinical aspect of clinical
psychology. Cummings, who is president of the Foundation for Behavioral
Health and Chairman of the Nicholas & Dorothy Cummings Foundation, Inc.,
was the founding CEO of American Biodyne (MedCo/Merck, then Merit, now
Magellan Behavioral Care), the first U.S. behavioral managed care company.
Dr. Cummings has also founded four campuses of the California School of
Professional Psychology, the National Academies of Practice, the American
Managed Behavioral Healthcare Association, and the National Council of Professional Schools of Psychology. Cummings has advanced the view that clinical psychologists should be trained to be knowledgeable consumers and
contributors to research, but that this is secondary to skill development for
clinical interventions.
The issues raised by Cummings and others led to a second major conference on training philosophy held in 1973 in Vail, Colorado, and the proceedings
of this conference became known as the “Vail Model.” The Vail conferees endorsed different principles from those endorsed by the conferees at the earlier
Boulder conference, leading to an alternative training model (D. R. Peterson,
1976, 1982). Psychological knowledge, it was argued, had matured enough to
warrant creation of explicitly professional programs along the lines of professional programs in medicine, dentistry, and law. These professional programs
were to be added to, not replace, Boulder-model doctoral programs. Further, it
was proposed that different degrees should designate the scientist-practitioner
role (PhD; emphasis on the term scientist) from the practitioner-scholar role
(PsyD—Doctor of Psychology; with emphasis on the term practitioner).
The Vail conference asserted the following parameters for doctoral training in clinical psychology:
• Vail-model programs in clinical psychology award a Doctorate of Psychology degree, referred to as a PsyD.
• Vail-model programs can be housed in three types of organizational settings. They are found in a psychology department that is part of a university setting. They are also found in a university-affiliated professional or
psychology school that may be part of a university. Or, they exist as independent, freestanding schools of professional psychology. The latter programs are not affiliated with universities; but rather are independently
developed and staffed.
14 Introduction
• These professional training programs focus primarily on clinical practice and
less on research, but graduates should know how to do research and how to
appropriately access and use research to inform their clinical practice.
• Professional schools can be not-for-profit or for-profit institutions and
several schools of professional psychology are affiliated in a network of
freestanding professional schools. These schools offer doctoral programs
in clinical psychology, and graduate work in counseling and master’s level
programs.
• PsyD programs are responsive to the market demands for clinical services
in their enrollment policies and procedures. Compared with PhD programs, they will enroll as many as three times the number of incoming
doctoral candidates per school (Mayne, Norcross, & Sayette, 1994). Over
time, this will create greater numerical parity in psychologist graduates
from scientist-practitioner programs.
The differences between clinical PhD and clinical PsyD programs are
quantitative, not qualitative. The primary disparity is in the relative emphasis
on research. Boulder programs aspire to train producers of research who will
work within academic settings and agencies. Vail programs train consumers of
research and individuals who will be the therapists and supervisors of therapists
in community agencies. The clinical opportunities for licensure and practice are
similar for students in both programs.
Several studies demonstrated that initial worries about stigmatization,
employment difficulties, and licensure uncertainty for PsyDs have never materialized (Hershey, Kopplin, & Cornell, 1991; D. R. Peterson, Eaton, Levine, &
Snepp, 1982). Nor are there discernible differences of late in employment except that the research-oriented, PhD graduates are far more likely to be employed in academic positions and medical schools (Gaddy, Charlot-Swilley,
Nelson, & Reich, 1995).
In terms of application and acceptance rates, PsyD programs average 141
applications and 53 acceptances, but there are significant differences as a result
of institutional location (Norcross, Sayette, & Mayne, 2002). Freestanding programs, on average, receive twice the number of applications as university department programs (with university professional schools in between).
Similarly, the freestanding programs accept significantly more of the applicants
than both types of university-based programs. The average acceptance rate for
PsyD programs is 40% to 41% (i.e., 4 out of 10 applicants to a PsyD program
are accepted). By contrast, the average acceptance rate for clinical PhD programs is 11% to 15% (i.e., 1 or 1.5 out of 10 are accepted).
Student Characteristics
The educational and demographic characteristics of PsyD and PhD students are
similar, but there is an interesting trend across the field. Seventy percent of all
clinical psychology doctoral students are now women, and about 20% are members of ethnic or racial minorities. The one difference between programs is that
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 15
students in PsyD programs are far more likely to have master’s degrees already
(and tend to be older) than PhD students who typically come right from undergraduate programs. About 35% of incoming PsyD students possess a master’s
degree, compared with about 20% in PhD programs (Norcross et al., 2002).
Licensure in Clinical Psychology
It has been said that when psychologists are under attack we circle the wagons
and shoot at each other. To some, this might seem to be the state of affairs in
obtaining the privilege to practice psychology through state licensure. Each
state board of professional psychology maintains its own requirements. Some
use the title “Clinical Psychologist” (e.g., Illinois, which has the designation of
licensed clinical psychologist). Indiana uses the term “Health Service Provider
in Psychology” as the designation for independent practice, and Pennsylvania
has a generic psychology license. The state boards also set minimum requirements (e.g., graduation from an APA accredited program). Some states require
a test on ethics, others an essay examination in research, and others an oral examination before a committee of the board. Some states accept ABPP diploma
status as a credential, whereas others ask that membership in the National Register be a credential for admission to the board process.
However, the good news is that there is a definite trend toward establishing
more consistency and continuity in professional credentialing standards across
states. It only makes sense that professional mobility serves the best interests of
the public. With appropriate checks and balances to address the times when
such mobility might be a risk to the public (e.g., an unscrupulous practitioner is
running away from his or her latest mistakes and seeking a new venue for exploitive or unprofessional practices), qualified providers will be able to practice
in different locations as their lives and interests may take them to new places. To
learn more about licensure and credentialing matters, including the option to
“bank” one’s credentials for mobility across states and future needs, consult the
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (www.asppb.org).
The Practicing Role of a Clinical Psychologist
What is most important for you, our students, is that clinical psychology is constantly changing. By the time you have completed your graduate work (either
PhD or PsyD), the field will have evolved beyond what we describe in this text.
Areas such as clinical health psychology, almost unknown a decade ago, have
become a major emphasis for clinicians. We work with physicians in health
care settings; lawyers in forensic settings; aerospace specialists, who look at behavior in space; and the military, who want to ameliorate the consequences of
training, battle, and homecoming from war.
Today’s practicing clinical psychologist is a primary care provider and can
be likened to a family doctor who treats a variety of problems. Ideally, there is
16 Introduction
no stigma to consulting a clinical psychologist. The clinician offers help with
many challenges in living such as child-rearing issues, school-related problems,
interactions with medical services (pain management, medication compliance),
substance abuse problems, issues in dealing with aging parents, and the full
range of emotional and behavioral disorders. This primary care function does
not mean that every individual enters therapy. Instead, the psychologist may
provide brief consultations (1 to 3 meetings), short-term treatments (3 to 20
visits), or extended intervention as appropriate. A professional relationship
with the psychologist may extend over many years and include multiple family
members. The clinician is a continuing psychological resource, to be consulted
on an “as needed” basis.
Preview of the Text
The following chapters in Part I detail the foundation of clinical psychology. In
Chapter 2, the activities of a clinical psychologist are described in greater detail.
Rather than focusing on a single area, we describe the overall professional culture and its subspecialties. We detail the similarities and differences between
clinical psychology subspecialties such as community psychology, health psychology and behavioral medicine, neuropsychology, forensic psychology, pediatric and child clinical psychology. The emphasis is on the common elements
and relationships of clinical psychologies. In addition, we offer a glimpse into
the lives of contemporary colleagues to provide perspective on living and working as a clinical psychologist.
Chapter 3 emphasizes the importance of understanding cultural differences and similarities when working with diversity. We first define cultural diversity and describe how it can impact—both positively and negatively—our
clinical formulations and interventions. Becoming a sensitive and aware clinician is essential. We explore many psychological processes that influence our
perceptions of culture and diversity, and we offer practical suggestions for integrating what we know about cultural variables into the context of what we do
in clinical settings.
In Chapter 4, we discuss clinical research and outcome assessment in a
highly understandable format. The importance of empirical support for clinical
psychology is discussed. We describe and discuss various research models including experimental, quasi-experimental, observational, and case study designs. The question of how we know which treatments are effective is explored
as we describe an outcome assessment framework for clinical practice.
Chapter 5 explores why (or how) people become patients. What brings
them in? What are they looking for? How has their life circumstance evolved into
one that now is maladaptive at its best and pathological at its most severe? There
are at least 12 common “d” words that describe why people seek therapy. The individual, family, or couple may be: discomforted, discontented, distressed, disabled, dysfunctional, disconnected, dispirited, disgusted, distraught, dissatisfied,
dyscontrolled, and disorganized. This first clinical chapter will discuss the broad
The History, Politics, and Social Environment of Clinical Psychology 17
issues of psychopathology and adaptation that affect the client’s general functioning and quality of life, health, and well-being.
To best understand psychopathology, we use the multiaxial diagnostic systems of DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and of ICD-10. An
individual is rarely totally pathological or incapacitated. To clarify this issue,
we discuss the interaction of function and psychopathology and how we determine the point at which “normal” behavior becomes pathological. Finally, we
discuss the specific treatment goals of therapy. Are we working to help the
client “feel better,” or is our goal to help the client to “get better?”
In Part II, “Basic Techniques for Clinicians,” we begin our discussion of
clinical issues. (This is really what you came for, isn’t it?) Basic techniques are
considered in two main subsections covering assessment and intervention.
The next three chapters cover the foundation of clinical intervention—the
clinical assessment. The reader becomes firmly grounded in the scientific approach to clinical practice, where the forming of hypotheses and the collection
of data are essential for everything we do. In Chapter 6, we introduce the purpose and goals of clinical assessment, the types of assessments, and the biopsychosocial model for understanding human behavior. This model directs us to
look at the biological/physiological/neurological correlates of behavior as well
as the psychological and social/environmental elements.
In Chapter 7, we continue the scientific approach to assessment, starting
with an explanation of a data-oriented model. Our discussion focuses on structuring the assessor’s critical thinking to be the best consumer of available information, including scientific information on different assessment devices. Using
the scientific method to approach assessment gears the clinician toward hypothesis testing, taking an operational approach to targeted domains, and using
a multimodal, multimethod, time-series assessment, as appropriate.
Chapter 8 continues the discussion of data collection strategies and tools,
taking a closer look at how to build an assessment protocol, how to decide what
needs to be assessed, and how to integrate clinical assessment into clinical practice. We discuss the use and integration of psychological assessment tools
including clinical interviews, psychological testing, observation, report of
significant others, report of other professionals, and self-report. A problemsolving approach to clinical decision making and assessment is emphasized to
assist clinicians in the assessment and treatment process.
Part III addresses the “how to” of psychotherapy. The key issue to be mastered is that of case conceptualization (i.e., building models for understanding
the client and developing appropriate interventions).
In Chapter 9, we focus on developing effective treatment conceptualizations. The highest order skill for the clinician is to develop a treatment model or
conceptualization. We both define and describe the conceptualization process
and describe how the treatment conceptualization informs the treatment plan
throughout therapy.
Chapter 10 explains the next step in therapy, developing the treatment
plan. We emphasize setting collaborative goals as well as developing and maintaining the therapeutic alliance or productive working relationship. Any relationship is filled with pitfalls and problems. The therapeutic relationship is no
18 Introduction
different. We identify the requirements of the therapeutic relationship, describe
techniques for relationship building, and outline some benchmarks of a good
working relationship.
It is hard to build a house without tools. It is equally difficult to build a
therapy without specific methods or tools. In Chapter 11, we discuss specific
methods or tools of intervention that you can add to your psychotherapy skills
repertoire. These methods are grouped according to interpersonal or systems
interventions, affective interventions, behavioral interventions, and cognitive
interventions.
Chapter 12 involves understanding, facilitating, and evaluating change.
We begin by exploring the basic principles of change and the concept of motivation to change. We then look at change in terms of dynamic stages, which helps
us to better understand the many variations in how clients actually make progress toward their goals. Next, we return briefly to the topic of assessment as we
discuss the measurement of change in therapy. Barriers to measuring change in
applied clinical contexts are explained, along with ways to overcome these barriers. Finally, we illustrate the mechanism of communicating about change
with clients, agencies, families, and cooperating professionals.
Next, we take a troubleshooting approach in our discussion of resistance
and impediments to change in Chapter 13. There are several areas of impediment or resistance to change. These include how the patient can be a source of
therapeutic impediment, how the therapist can be a source of therapeutic impediment, how the environment can be a source of therapeutic impediment,
and how the psychological disorder can be a source of therapeutic impediment.
Therapy should not be viewed as a life sentence. In Chapter 14, an effective termination strategy is presented. We illustrate seven types of termination,
on a spectrum from positive to unprofessional. We then explain the professional standards of care for competent termination. In addition, 10 applied
skills for an effective termination are detailed.
In Part IV, Chapter 15, we discuss a frequently avoided but critically important topic. Few careers can be as taxing as clinical psychology. We are dealing with the feelings, actions, problems, traumas, and miseries of others. There
is great weight in what we say and do because our actions have life-altering effects. In this chapter, which focuses on caring for yourself and your colleagues,
we describe therapist burnout. As we consider ways to use positive psychology
in our quest to thrive personally and professionally, we provide access to information on self-care ideas and resources that include the scientific knowledge
generated in our own field.









You have likely decided to pursue graduate studies in clinical psychology
because you are curious about people. You are probably interested in
learning how and why people think, behave, learn, make decisions and judgments, and interact with others the way they do. What accounts for the differences between and among people? Is it biology? Is it environment? Is it
culture? Or is it a combination of variables? You may wonder why some people
function well within their environments and among coworkers, family, and
friends; whereas others have difficulty in similar environments. Perhaps you
want to formally investigate more specific questions relating to these topics, or
you plan to consume information established in the psychology literature so
that you can help people be comfortable with themselves and others. Clinical
psychology is a broad umbrella term for the substantive field of psychology that
addresses such questions.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Describe the elements of a clinical psychology.
• Identify the common elements of the clinical psychologies.
• Discuss the importance of a constant interchange of ideas between clinical
science and the application of that science.
• List at least five fields or specialties of clinical psychology.
• Discuss the ethical obligations specific to declaring a specialty in clinical
psychology.
20 Introduction
The American Psychological Association’s Society of Clinical Psychology
(Division 12) defines the field as follows:
The field of Clinical Psychology integrates science, theory, and practice to understand, predict, and alleviate maladjustment, disability, and discomfort as well
as to promote human adaptation, adjustment, and personal development. Clinical Psychology focuses on the intellectual, emotional, biological, psychological,
social, and behavioral aspects of human functioning across the life span, in
varying cultures, and at all socioeconomic levels (APA, n.d.-b).
Within this definition lie the common threads that tie together the many
specialties of this greater field. A closer look at each aspect of this description throughout the chapters in this book magnifies the fantastic array of
opportunities for individuals trained in clinical psychology and highlights
the necessity for decision making throughout your graduate training.
The goal of this chapter is not just to give you a bird’s eye view of the
field of clinical psychology, but also to help you begin your journey into
that field.
Becoming a clinical psychologist is much more complex than just graduating from a doctoral program (and that alone is no small accomplishment).
Becoming a clinical psychologist requires acculturation to the profession,
and its norms, mores, and customs. Acculturation is defined as “a set of internal psychological outcomes including a clear sense of personal and cultural
identity, good mental health, and the achievement of personal satisfaction
in the new cultural context” (Berry & Sam, 1997, p. 299). Becoming an
ethical psychologist adds another layer to the acculturation process (Handelsman, Gottlieb, & Knapp, 2005) and is even more challenging because the ethical guidelines for practice are sometimes ambiguous. Navigating in a new
culture of an ethical clinical psychology can initially feel like navigating in a
strange land.
This book approaches the field of clinical psychology from your perspective—someone who wants to be a part of this field. Thus, we first aim to guide
you in the understanding of the field of clinical psychology, broadly defined.
Chapter 2 begins with a basic description of the core components: science,
theory, and practice. It orients readers to the focus of clinical psychology,
and the themes that are the underpinnings of each specific chapter that
follows. The remainder of this chapter introduces the many career paths clinical psychologists may take, explains how to gain credentials, experience, and
expertise, and tells you where to find more information about the topics that
interest you. Leaders and exemplars in the field offer their perspectives on
particular areas of specialty and provide recommendations for preparing
yourself to jump in. The descriptions are meant to inspire, interest, and encourage you to talk to practicing professionals throughout your training
so that you can make a well-informed decision about the specialty that best
suits you. Training credentials and pertinent ethical principles are described
in detail.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 21
Elements of a Clinical Psychology
Science
Clinical psychology has foundations in biological, physical, and social sciences.
Research and investigation in these areas have contributed to the understanding of human functioning at various independent and interacting levels: the
mind-body connection; intellectual functioning; emotional processing; behavior; and the interactions of biological, social, and psychological systems. Science
refers to any knowledge that is based on investigation of relevant phenomena
by empirical methods.
Empirical methods are methods such as observation or experimentation
that are used to identify, study, and test objective phenomena. Naturalistic observation refers to systematically studying a (clinical) phenomenon in its naturally occurring environment, without interference, manipulation, or influence
by the investigator. Experimental techniques entail manipulating (influencing,
controlling) persons, their environment, or some aspect of their biological, psychological, behavioral, or social behaviors. Such observations and experimentation help scientists understand antecedents, consequences, maintaining
variables, and related variables to the phenomena being studied.
Empirical methods, either naturalistic or experimental, usually rely
heavily on operational definitions and replicable techniques that allow for
verification of findings and are grounded in the scientific method. The scientific
method is a core component of a scientific psychology, similar to most sciences. The scientific method has four components: guiding question, hypothesis, experiment or observation to collect data, and interpretation of results
from the experiment. Later in this book, we discuss the scientific approach to
assessment and treatment of persons with clinical problems related to cognitive and behavioral excesses and deficits. Also, more specific empirical methods and techniques used in clinical psychology are discussed in chapters on
clinical research methods, outcome assessment, clinical assessment, and evaluation of change.
Theory
Clinical psychology, like other specialties in psychology, draws on many theories of personality, individual “normal” and abnormal behavior, family systems,
memory, gender differences and feminist perspectives, development, learning,
culture, and other areas of human functioning. A theory is defined as “a general principle formulated to explain a group of related phenomena” (Chaplin,
1985, p. 467). Theories can generally not be proven, and thus, they do not become facts, although scientists often seek to show support for theories.
The difficulty in proving a theory is that human behavior is subject to individual nuances that lead to some exceptions to a particular theory. This does
not mean that a theory does not hold true in the majority of situations, or that
the theory is no longer useful in generally understanding human functioning.
Support for theories can be easy to find, whereas evidence against a particular
22 Introduction
theory may be more difficult to objectively demonstrate. If you had a theory
that persons of your body weight and height could open a 200-pound steel door
by throwing themselves at the door and you could do so freely, you would be
supporting your theory. Supporting your theory that the door could not be
opened by this technique would be more difficult to demonstrate without raising many questions. If you threw your body against the door but could not
open it, you could suggest that you were incapable of opening the door; however, there could be many other reasons you were unable to open the door besides your height, body weight, and technique. Can you think of some of these
reasons? Motivation, effort, force (drawing on physics), location where your
body made contact with the door, and many other possible reasons could explain your lack of success. Also, you could not prove this theory to others because somewhere in the universe might exist someone of your height and
weight who could exercise the same technique and successfully open the door.
As such, you could again lend support to your theory (that persons of your
height and weight can open a 200 pound steel door by throwing your body into
it), but you could not prove this statement as fact.
A large part of what clinical psychologists do and believe about human
functioning and behavior is based on theory—some that is empirically supported, and much that is not. Some specialties within the field of clinical psychology rely more heavily than others on empirically supported or validated
theories and practices. Clinical psychologists and psychologists-in-training are
encouraged to adopt a scientific skeptic’s approach to literature, practice recommendations, and scientific outcome studies that are produced within the
greater field as well as their subdisciplines or specialties. In fact, laypersons also
should be inquisitive and skeptical of theories, practice recommendations, and
published studies from any discipline or field—psychology or others—to ensure
they are wise and discriminating consumers of reputed facts on the information
highways. Such thinking might mitigate the influence of talk-show guests, television or radio hosts, and advice-giving newspaper or magazine columnists
when they share theories with little to no scientific merit. The following subsections define the tenets of clinical psychology.
Practice
Practice, quite simply, usually refers to psychologists putting their knowledge
and skills into use. The practice of clinical psychology may take the form of
teaching clinical psychology foundations, theory, or practice; supervision or
training (of psychologists, trainees, other health or mental health professionals,
laypersons, teachers, police officers, etc.); administration; assessment and treatment; program evaluation/research; and consultation. Some of these roles distinguish clinical psychologists from nondoctoral practitioners or other health
and mental health care professionals. Research on mental health issues, treatment, and best practices is most often accomplished by doctoral-level psychologists and is a core component of clinical psychology practice that differentiates
these experts from others in different fields and professions. Likewise, persons
with master’s degrees may perform some roles and functions of clinical psychologists, but are limited in what they can do compared with doctoral-level
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 23
clinical psychologists (teaching doctoral-level courses, providing independent
assessment and treatment without supervision from a licensed psychologist).
Discussion of these differences is beyond the scope of this chapter, and since
state laws differ, interested readers are directed to the rules and regulations of
practice for their respective states.
The American Psychological Association and other publishers offer journals specific to the roles and functions that represent different areas of clinical
psychologists’ practice. Journals such as Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice; Health Psychology; Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice; Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings; Journal of Personality Assessment; and Rehabilitation Psychology illustrate the integration of science and theory in the application or practice
of the various roles for clinical psychologists. Reviewing a few issues of these
journals might pique your interest in a particular area of clinical psychology
and provide insight into how science and theory influence practice.
Integrating the Elements
Some clinical psychologists focus their work on a specific defining aspect of the
field such as their scientist training. They concentrate on scientific investigation
of clinical phenomena and choose to spend little or no time in clinical/patientcare practice. Other clinical psychologists, though trained in scientific techniques, are solely practitioners and do not engage in scientific investigation at
all. There are even some theoreticians who philosophize, publish, promulgate,
and teach about clinical phenomena, without producing scientific work or engaging in clinical practice. Clinical psychology benefits from professionals who
focus on specific aspects of the disciplines and also from those who attend to the
science, theory, and practice of psychology, as related to clinical phenomena.
We advocate for clinical psychologists to maintain awareness of developing theories, cutting-edge science, and best practices, regardless of their professional work. The American Psychological Association’s and licensing boards’
support and expectation of continuing education for clinical psychologists increase the likelihood of achieving this goal. Those who can balance and integrate these aspects of the field, no matter what their specialty may be, benefit
from the vast array of knowledge available to alleviate clients’ maladjustment
and distress, and increase prosocial and positive functioning, consistent with
the field’s mission.
The mission statement of APA’s Division of Clinical Psychology highlights
the purpose for clinical psychologists’ integration of science, theory, and practice: to understand, predict, and alleviate maladjustment, disability, and discomfort and to promote human adaptation, adjustment, and personal development.
Throughout this book, the scientific, theoretical, and practical approaches to the
understanding and prediction of human behavior are highlighted; specifically,
chapters on clinical research and assessment are designed to deepen your understanding of these concepts. The purpose of alleviating maladjustment, disability, and discomfort differentiates clinical psychology from other disciplines
within psychology, such as industrial/organizational psychology or developmental psychology. Industrial/organizational psychology focuses on industrial
problems concerning employee practices, working conditions, and employment
24 Introduction
rewards and response costs; industrial psychology might also include aspects of
business such as marketing, advertising, and the military (Chaplin, 1985). Developmental psychology focuses on human development, maturation processes,
experiences throughout the life span and their effects on later functioning. Developmental psychologists mostly focus on understanding, theorizing, predicting, and explaining such life events, rather than producing and implementing
interventions for behavior change or alleviating suffering, maladjustment, or
disability. In disciplines like these—in contrast to some aspects of clinical psychology—the focus is not in patient care or individual practice. Yet, child clinical
psychologists would incorporate the learning of developmental psychologists in
their thinking about their patients or research.
Promoting Human Adaptation, Adjustment, and
Personal Development
It is important to note that clinical psychology focuses not only on positive aspects of human behavior and functioning but also on maladaptive behavior,
psychopathology, and personal and interpersonal problems. As stated in Division 12’s mission, the field strives to recognize, increase, and facilitate prosocial
functioning, positive adjustment, and personal development. Some clinical psychologists work exclusively on primary prevention (prevention of disease or illness in susceptible persons); others concentrate on social skills training for
social competence, life skills coaching in areas such as time management, and
optimizing persons’ quality of life, even in the absence of problematic situations, stressors, or clinical problems.
In 2000 and 2001, the inception of the Journal of Positive Psychology and several other articles in the American Psychologist (Fredrickson, 2001; Lyubomirsky,
2001; Masten, 2001; Schneider, 2001; Sheldon & King, 2001) introducing “positive psychology” intended to reorient or remind psychologists across disciplines
that highlighting positive aspects of human functioning instead of deficits or
weaknesses is important in clinical work and scientific research. Sheldon and
King (2001) define positive psychology as the “scientific study of ordinary
human strengths and virtues”; emphasis is on the average person and on effective functioning. They argue that the positive psychology movement contrasts
with traditional negative bias found in many aspects of psychology. In addition to
examples from evolutionary and economic psychology, the authors illustrate
clinical psychology’s focus on psychopathology, and social cognitive psychology’s
attention to biases, negative judgments, and errors in thinking. The Division 12’s
mission statement for clinical psychology states that “promoting human adaptation, adjustment, and personal development” is a goal. Clinicians in their daily
practice should strive to attend to and incorporate knowledge from this pertinent
aspect of the field. Positive psychology is discussed further in Chapter 15 of this
book, “Self-Care and Ethics: Applying the Techniques of Positive Psychology.”
A Focus on Multiple Dimensions of Human Functioning
Clinical psychology recognizes the multidimensional nature of human functioning. To evaluate intellectual, emotional, biological, psychological, social and be-
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 25
havioral aspects of human functioning as independent components would provide a narrow and likely inaccurate view of an individual or persons. Therefore,
a multidimensional approach to research, assessment, treatment, and understanding of individuals, person-environment, and person-person relationships
is required. Throughout this book, we highlight the multidimensional approach
to understanding people, their strengths, weaknesses, excesses, and deficits. In
clinical psychology, the various facets of human functioning are studied across
the life span, and within the context of various cultures and socioeconomic levels. Where possible, these distinctions are illustrated.
Training Qualifications and Ethics Regulations
Training and qualifications such as coursework, certificate or degree requirements, and years and type of experience differ for various specialties. Description of each specialty’s requirements is beyond the scope of this chapter. There
are, however, basic qualifications that are common to all clinical psychologies,
which include a bachelor degree, a doctoral degree, and predoctoral internship.
Postdoctoral supervised training and licensure are optional for some careers
that are not oriented toward independent service delivery. Continuing education credits are another state-legislated requirement of all licensed professionals. Board certification distinguishes specialists from general practitioners, and
this credential is discussed. The APA Ethics Code is critical to self-regulating
one’s professional activity and testimony of specialty, so relevant principles in
the Code are described.
Doctoral Degree
Individuals must obtain their doctoral degree to be eligible to become a clinical
psychologist. Master’s degrees are often awarded during the course of doctoral
training, and some terminal master’s degrees are granted in the field of clinical
psychology. However, the master’s degree does not permit the use of the title
“clinical psychologist,” nor does it allow for independent practice specifically in
this field. (Master’s level therapists can earn some licenses that are titled “counselor,” or something similar.) To become a clinical psychologist requires training in a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), a Doctor of Psychology (PsyD), or a Doctor
of Education (EdD) program focusing on applied clinical psychology. The
American Psychological Association accredits programs in psychology, and this
accreditation is critical to ensure one’s doctoral degree will likely transfer from
state to state and be accepted by state licensing boards. There are, however, excellent programs that are not yet eligible for APA accreditation because they are
new or do not intend to train practitioners and deem this certification unnecessary. Applicants should always inquire about APA status and the limits to licensure and practice in the local and distant areas if a program is not accredited.
The most common doctoral training programs, PhD, PsyD, and EdD, are described to clarify the similarities and differences in the degrees and career options available.
26 Introduction
Doctorate of Philosophy (in Clinical Psychology)
A PhD program typically follows the Boulder Model of training to produce
scientist-practitioners on graduation. The Boulder Model is so named after
the seminal conference held in Boulder, Colorado, in 1949 that defined the
research-practice emphasis desired in PhD programs. PhD programs are usually housed in university settings. Fewer students are accepted in these programs than in PsyD or EdD programs because students are usually required to
work in a faculty member’s research lab for the duration of their graduate
training and are paid a stipend or tuition remission for doing so. PhD programs
traditionally emphasize research training more than practitioner-oriented programs. The core belief in the Boulder Model of training is that clinical psychologists must be producers of research and science to be skilled users of research
and current knowledge. Thus, the exchange between practice and research is
deemed critical to advance the field. However, the degree to which any program prepares individuals for careers in any of the subspecialties or for research, teaching, administration, or clinical work varies greatly.
PhD programs are typically designed to be completed in an average of 5 to
7 years postundergraduate degree. Some require the completion of a terminal
master’s degree and some field experience prior to admission. Entrance into
doctoral programs is very competitive. Acceptance may be even more competitive than most medical schools since there are often only a few seats available
and many competitive applicants for each entry class.
Doctorate of Psychology in Clinical Psychology
The PsyD programs ascribe to the Vail Model of training. This model was so
named after a 1973 meeting that was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to explore the alternative training models that would accommodate the changing needs and demands of society. A doctoral level
alternative to the PhD, the PsyD, was endorsed. This training model prepares
individuals to be practitioner-scholars. The National Council of Schools and
Programs of Professional Psychology (NCSPP) put forth a recommended core
curriculum for professional psychology training programs that includes the following competencies: Relationship, Intervention, Assessment, Research and
Evaluation, Consultation and Education, and Management and Supervision
(R. L. Peterson et al., 1992), and Diversity was later added. The PsyD programs,
while needing to justify their curriculum to meet APA standards, do not have
the same governing curricular guidelines.
Unless you have enrolled in a PsyD program, you may be surprised to
learn that PsyD graduate students have coursework and some requirements in
research as well. Many aspiring psychologists erroneously believe that research
skills differentiate PsyD from PhD graduates. This may be true to some degree
for career paths and training emphasis, but it is inaccurate to say that PsyD students do not acquire research skills. The type of research that is commonly conducted differs, although this is not necessary. The research of PsyD students
frequently involves studying “local science,” or examining phenomena in clinical practice or the community, more than benchmark research of underlying
psychological processes and principles. Qualitative research and case studies
are common methodologies for completion of a PsyD dissertation study,
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 27
whereas quantitative observational and outcomes research might be more
common in scientist-practitioner training programs.
Doctorate of Education
Doctorates of Education (EdD) are recipients of degrees that focus on counselor
education. Most psychologists with an EdD work in school or educational settings, but some also work in agency counseling or community counseling settings. EdD psychology programs typically have less emphasis on research than
psychology programs, and typically less coursework and practical experience in
psychological assessment, intervention, and psychopathology. Assessment skills
gained are often more psychoeducational and occupational, instead of focusing
on personality or psychopathology. However, EdD students are usually eligible
to compete for internships in clinical psychology, in which case they can gain
assessment and intervention skills, and subsequent requirements necessary for
independent practice.
Predoctoral Internship
All doctoral programs leading toward qualification as a clinical psychologist require a predoctoral internship training year prior to awarding the doctoral degree. Clinical psychology predoctoral internships are full-time programs for 1
year, or part-time programs for 2 years, in which students function as a practicing psychologist under the supervision of a licensed psychologist. Students
often leave their home base training program to seek supplemental or altogether new training in a clinical practice of their choice. Predoctoral internships
occur in any of the various settings previously discussed, or in a combination of
settings. Interns may specialize in a particular area of patient care (e.g., severe
mental illness, acute care), or seek general training. Predoctoral internships
should have weekly seminars and didactics, and ongoing supervision of all professional activities. This training experience usually is the culmination of the
doctoral degree, unless outstanding dissertation work needs to be completed.
Most programs permit or encourage students to seek internships through
the Association of Psychology and Postdoctoral Internship Centers (APPIC).
This national organization lists qualified internship and postdoctoral training
sites, and serves to match sites with applicants according to a two-way ranking
system. It is one of the predominant affiliations that clinical psychologists recognize as certification that a predoctoral training program is of sufficient rigor
and breadth in experience. The APA also accredits internships, and training in
an APPIC or APA-accredited internship is essential for licensure in many states,
or for obtaining some academic jobs. A challenge in the field is that there is a
national shortage of APA-accredited internships compared with the number of
graduate students in need of training. Some policymakers in the field, therefore, advocate granting degrees and making the internship year a postdoctoral,
postdegree requirement.
Postdoctoral Fellowships and Postdoctoral Training
On completion of the doctoral degree, the doctoral degree recipient is ready to
practice psychology, right? This is not exactly the case. Graduates of doctoral
28 Introduction
programs who want to practice clinical psychology must obtain supervised
postdoctoral training to be eligible for state licensure. Postdoctoral fellowships
or internships can be similar to predoctoral internships; few of them, however,
are part of a regular postdoctoral training program and they are not regulated
by the degree-granting institution. The number of hours required, or what
constitutes appropriate training experiences, varies by state. Fulfilling this
training requirement can be a challenge because graduates may have outstanding debts to pay from graduate school, and the income earned by most postdoctoral fellows or interns is substantially less than that of a regularly practicing professional. Postdoctoral fellows need supervision and may be limited in
their ability to bill fully for services. However, if you were to ask graduates of
doctoral programs if they would want to skip their postdoctoral training year
and immediately become solely responsible for their work, many would say
“no!” There is much to learn about practicing as a clinical psychologist, whether
it is how to write research grants, how to enlist oneself on insurance panels or
market a private practice, or how to obtain privileges in a neighborhood hospital. The postdoctoral training year transitions graduates into their role as a full
professional by teaching them essential skills through apprenticeship and training, and initiates a career-long practice of peer consultation and support.
Licensure
Each state controls and regulates the privilege to practice psychology. Licensure
is an individual qualification that is obtained through state regulatory boards.
Practitioners must be licensed to practice independently and use the title “psychologist.” Licensed psychologists must meet the following minimal requirements: (a) a doctoral degree in a psychology or psychology-related field, (b) 1
year of predoctoral supervised clinical work, (c) 1 year of postdoctoral supervised clinical work, (d) a passing score on the national standardized exam (the
Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology, or EPPP), and (e) any state
mandated standardized, written, or oral examination on state law and professional ethics. Licensure is a quality control mechanism that ensures the minimum standards have been met for the privilege of calling oneself a psychologist.
Licensure only regulates the use of the title “psychologist,” not “clinical
psychologist” or “clinical health psychologist,” or even “forensic psychologist.”
Licensure is general, and the description of one’s practice is self-regulated and
dictated by the legal and ethical standards set forth by the state and profession.
Essentially, the psychologist is held responsible for “truth in packaging.” One
must be qualified as competent on the basis of training, education, and experience to offer either general or specialized psychological services. Thus, calling
oneself a clinical psychologist requires appropriate licensure as a psychologist,
and credentials in clinical psychology (doctorate, internships, and postdoctoral
training). This quality control mechanism and state regulations are in place to
protect the public from unqualified practitioners putting themselves forward as
something they are not, and ensuring that those who are psychologists meet the
minimal standards set forth at the time of licensure and throughout their
tenure in the field. Those who engage in unqualified practice, either by misusing the title or misusing a method or procedure due to incompetence, negli-
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 29
gence, or willful disregard of the law can be subject to legal sanctions for unprofessional conduct.
Continuing Education
State licensing boards mandate psychologists to complete a certain number of
continuing education credits per license cycle (usually 2 years). Continuing education requirements were developed to ensure that psychologists maintain
some degree of currency with movements and training in the field. Almost all
states require some portion of the continuing education requirement to include
ethics workshops or training. What constitutes credit varies to allow scholars,
practitioners, and researchers to obtain credits in their area of expertise. In
Pennsylvania, individually publishing a research article counts for 10 continuing education credit hours; the credit for coauthoring an article is calculated by
dividing 10 hours by the number of authors.
Teaching classes, attending workshops, completing online courses, turning
in quizzes from current research articles, or at-home study can all count toward continuing education credit in most states. State boards randomly audit
individual psychologists to ensure compliance with this law. Review requires
psychologists to produce their continuing education certificates and verification of fulfilling the requirements.
Board Certification
Psychologists can and are encouraged to seek certification or a diploma in one
of the specialties recognized by the American Board of Professional Psychology
(ABPP).
This board is independent of the American Psychological Association, but
was incorporated with their help in 1947. This governing body protects the public
by ensuring and certifying individuals’ qualifications and skills to deliver services
and practice within a designated specialty area. According to ABPP, a specialty
area is a “defined area in the practice of psychology that connotes special competency acquired through an organized sequence of formal education, training, and
experience” (ABPP, n.d.). The ABPP awards diplomas, resulting in one becoming a
“diplomate,” based on a thorough review of credentials (doctoral training, license,
appropriate internship and postdoctoral training), self-statement, work samples,
and an oral examination by existing board members.
ABPP recognizes the following specialties through Member Boards: child
and adolescent psychology, cognitive and behavioral psychology, clinical psychology, clinical health psychology, clinical neuropsychology, counseling psychology,
family psychology, forensic psychology, group psychology, psychoanalysis, rehabilitation psychology, school psychology, and organization and business. While
board certification to date is only sought by approximately 10% of licensed psychologists, it is becoming more important for financial reimbursement from insurance companies, reciprocity between state licensing boards, and distinction
among colleagues in an ever-growing competitive profession. Outside the field of
psychology, medical and forensic colleagues perhaps are most likely to look for
this credential when collaborating, referring to, or seeking psychologists.
30 Introduction
Respecialization
Psychologists who want to shift the focus of their practice after completing their
training are expected to seek necessary education, training, consultation, or supervision from others with the desired expertise. For complete respecialization,
psychologists can enroll in formal training programs to complete portions of a
clinical degree that pertain to their area of interest. Psychologists may choose to
do additional practicums or internships or take relevant coursework in neuropsychology if their original training was in clinical child psychology. Some
programs may award certificates of respecialization, but the preparation to shift
or designate focus in one’s practice is largely self-governed by following the
ethics code.
Ethics Guidelines
An old adage suggests, “A wise man knows what he knows, and knows what he
doesn’t know.” This could not be truer than in the self-evaluation and selfpromotion of one’s clinical abilities in psychology. By-and-large, clinical psychology is a self-regulated field to the extent that practitioners must meet the
minimal competency standards for training qualifications and emotional wellbeing necessary for practice in their designated area. Emotional well-being is
discussed in detail in Chapter 15, and therefore, only competence in training is
addressed here.
Competency in psychology is accomplished by completion of doctoral
training, supervised postdoctoral hours, licensure, and continuing education
credits. The monitoring of a person’s competency or skill becomes a more diffuse process following licensure. Becoming a licensed professional offers a high
degree of independence, even among those who work in a hierarchical organization such as a hospital or clinic where there may be quality oversight through
various mechanisms. To protect the public from clinicians who might allow
their skills to erode or become obsolete by failing to keep up with new developments, the state regulatory boards generally mandate a certain amount of regular continuing education for all health-related professionals as a minimum
effort for maintaining competence. So, if psychologists have a current license
and complete the requisite number of continuing education credits, they are
theoretically competent to practice as they see fit, within the guidelines of the
American Psychological Association’s Ethics Code (2002). But to truly become
and remain competent, professional psychologists must acquire a great deal of
specialized knowledge, clinical experience, and a strong set of skills for selfcontrol and self-regulation.
Specialties in Clinical Psychology
Specialists in clinical psychology focus their careers on working with a particular age group or diagnosis, with a specific population, in a select setting, or
with emphasis on a type of therapeutic modality, or stage of intervention.
Some combination of these parameters can also be chosen to create unique and
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 31
valued specialties. Examples of these specialties are described, and those that
are most common are highlighted with descriptions of associated organizations, and professional groups, and by snapshots of days in the life of professionals practicing in their fields.
Specialties across the Life Span
To think of any major mind-body function or aspect of psychology across the
biopsychosocial model in reference to a 5-year-old versus a 50-year-old, most
would agree that even similar functions and processes are different between
the two. Communication, thought and reasoning processes, expression and
experience of emotion, physical responses to stressors, social relations, perception and experience of one’s environment, and even the types of psychopathology manifested differ across the life span. Clinical psychologists need to be
experts in normal and abnormal psychological human functioning for the population with which they work. Although some psychologists adopt a generalist
approach that allows them to work with patients across the life span, these professionals likely have other limits to their practice because they cannot address
the gamut of all issues for all patients. Three specialties that are recognized
within the field are clinical child and adolescent psychology, pediatric psychology, and
clinical geropsychology.
The focus of the specialty in clinical child and adolescent psychology, as
described by the mission statement of Division 53 of the American Psychological Association, is on the scientific, training, practice, and professional aspects
of “furthering knowledge, welfare, and mental health of children, youth,
and families” (Masten, 2001). Child psychologists often have more expertise in
behavioral analysis; assessment and intervention; intellectual assessment; play
therapy; and milieu or home-based evaluation than general practitioners. Child
psychologists can maintain any theoretical orientation in their practice of therapy or scientific research. However, behavioral assessment and intervention are
preferred approaches for many child problems and disorders.
The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT) has Special Interest Groups (SIG) that bring together professionals who subdivide the
specialty of clinical child and adolescent psychology even further. Relating to
child and adolescent psychology, ABCT’s Special Interest Groups include “Parenting and Families”; “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in School Settings”;
“Child and School Related Disorders”; “Child Maltreatment and Violence”;
and “Child and Adolescent Anxiety.” Child and adolescent psychologists can
choose to focus on any and all aspects of clinical psychology as previously defined (science, theory, practice). Child and adolescent psychologists may work
in a large variety of settings, such as academic institutions, psychiatric facilities, administrative organizations, or private practice. Some child psychologists work in hospital settings and focus on the health, physical illness, and
well-being of children and adolescents and are typically classified as “pediatric psychologists.”
The Society of Pediatric Psychology was founded in 1968, and is a division of the American Psychological Association (Division 54). Scientists and
professionals practicing pediatric psychology focus on health care of children,
32 Introduction
adolescents, and their families. Practitioners of pediatric psychology work in
interdisciplinary settings such as family medicine practices, children’s hospitals, developmental clinics, academic settings, or traditional child psychology
venues. Pediatric psychology is actually a subspecialty of behavioral medicine
and health psychology, and perhaps represents the interface between health
psychology and clinical psychology focusing on children, adolescents, and
families. Pediatric psychologists work to address such issues as coping with
chronic illnesses, behavioral change for prevention or maintenance of child or
adolescent weight gain/loss, preparation for surgical or medical procedures,
psychological development of children who have chronic or acute medical illnesses, head traumas, or physical disabilities. Clinical and research areas of
interest may focus on crises, prevention, assessment, intervention, maintenance, or all those issues. Professionals in this field also address children or
adolescents within the context of their family, and aid parents and siblings in
coping and adjusting to the identified patient’s needs, lifestyle, or psychological changes. Pediatric psychologists often offer services to these constituents
directly as well. Dr. Anne Kazak is a nationally and internationally known pediatric psychologist. She shares her perspectives on the field and her career in
Box 2.1.
Box 2.1 Highlights of a Contemporary Clinical Psychologist
Anne Kazak, PhD, ABPP
Dr. Kazak is a graduate of University of Virginia, predoctoral intern at
Yale University School of Medicine—Connecticut Mental Health Center,
licensed psychologist in Pennsylvania, and Board Certified in Family Psychology by the American Board of Professional Psychology.
Dr. Kazak is a member of numerous organizations: American Psychological Association (Fellow—Divisions 12, 38, 43, 44, 54); Society for Research in Child Development; American Family Therapy Academy;
Association of Medical School Psychologists; Association for Cognitive and
Behavioral Therapies; International Society for the Study of Traumatic
Stress; Society of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics; Pennsylvania
Psychological Association; and the American Psychosocial Oncology Society. She obtains her continuing education credits through attendance at these conferences, and
stays informed with the literature through annual memberships to psychology, medical, and multidisciplinary journals. In addition to those she edits, she reads the following journals regularly:
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, Professional Psychology, Clinical Psychology, and Health Psychology; Families, Systems and Health, Pediatrics, Journal of
Traumatic Stress, Journal of Clinical Oncology, and Pediatric Blood and Cancer. She provides the following overview of her exciting niche and career.
I am a clinical psychologist whose work is at the intersection of pediatric and family
psychology. I am a professor in the Department of Pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania and Director of the Department of Psychology and Deputy Director of the Behavioral Health Center at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). CHOP is a
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 33
large, academic pediatric center. In my current position, I spend one third of my time in
administration (overseeing a department of approximately 60 doctoral level psychologists and collaborating with others through our academic medical center to develop and
sustain behavioral programs) and two thirds in a variety of research and mentoring activities with local, national, and international foci. My lab is currently organized
around two federal research grants from the National Cancer Institute addressing the
development of interventions for children with cancer and their families. I also serve as
a mentor to postdoctoral fellows, and psychologists and pediatricians. I do not see patients at the present time. Currently, I am the editor of the Journal of Family Psychology
and a past editor of the Journal of Pediatric Psychology. And I am active nationally in the
American Psychological Association (APA), now as past president of the Society of Pediatric Psychology (SPP) and chair of an APA task force on Evidence Based Practice for
Children and Adolescents.
A Day in the Life of Dr. Kazak
I get up between 6:00 and 6:30. I’m usually the first one up and initiate the morning
routines for our Rhodesian Ridgeback (Bella) and cat (Moxiefe). I eat breakfast with
my partner (Chris) and 4.5-year-old son (Sam), catch a bit of news from the newspaper
or the television and pack lunch. At some point before leaving for work, I generally
peek at my e-mail. I drive to work (about 30 minutes door to door), sometimes dropping Sam off at preschool.
My day at work is split between research and administrative responsibilities. I’m usually at work between 8:00 and 8:30 and leave between 5:00 and 5:30. I generally do not
take time for lunch unless I am having a business lunch. It’s difficult to say what a typical day is like because they are quite variable, some spent more in administrative responsibilities and others more focused on research or mentoring. There is a lot of time
at home spent on work, on evenings and weekends. Some typical examples during a
workday include:
• Meetings with other staff about administrative matters related to the Department of Psychology or the Behavioral Health Center: These may include discussions of programmatic and/or budgetary planning, staff recruitment, development and review of
policies or topics such as planning around space or other resources, quality improvement, or regulatory issues. There are often conversations that might be
broadly described as “problem-solving,” whether around a clinical issue and a
specific patient situation, or to figure out how to best accomplish goals related
to projects and initiatives.
• Meetings with research staff to review projects and detailed discussions about study progress and difficulties encountered in projects: Our clinical research involves the development and delivery of clinical services to patients and families, so these
sessions may include review of tapes of sessions and discussions of our impressions of the treatments and their impact. Depending on the phase of a project,
we may also be reviewing results and discussing next steps for data analysis.
I enjoy writing and value this as one of the most important aspects of my professional
life. Often there is at least one manuscript in preparation and/or a grant that is being
written or revised. I am also frequently reading and editing work that is being written
34 Introduction
collaboratively with others or papers from trainees. In order to facilitate the process of
writing, I take occasional days for working at home. These days, with less distraction,
are critical to my productivity. It’s also common that I come into the office for a couple
of hours on Saturday mornings to write.
The process of running a research lab and conducting research entails meetings and
materials to review related to potential new projects and collaborations. It’s not unusual, to attend a meeting with a group of potential collaborators, anticipating the
submission of a new grant proposal or exploring ideas for collaborative efforts. Related to this category of activity, I’m also commonly addressing questions from people
at CHOP, nationally and internationally about research projects and potential collaborations. More and more conference calls are used to facilitate collaborations across
institutions. It’s also common to meet with mentees to discuss projects or professional development issues. And, research has administrative activities, so phone calls
with our business administrator or completion of paperwork related to grants is also
common.
As a journal editor, I work with my journal assistant to assure that submitted manuscripts are entered properly through the electronic journal management system, that
reviewers are identified and assigned to papers and that we can track the flow of papers
through the editorial process. I am almost always carrying with me the materials to
write at least one editorial letter. There are also publishing deadlines to meet in order to
produce each issue of the journal and numerous questions, some easy, some more
complex, from authors and reviewers that I answer almost everyday.
E-mail is a key component of all of my activities. The amount of e-mail can be considerable and involves “conversations” about many administrative issues from many individuals in the Hospital and information about research studies and questions from
team members. I’m “copied” on many conversations which helps keep me informed
about a variety of issues of concern. Nationally, I receive e-mail from a variety of listservs and communications from people around the world about research projects and
other national activities.
I usually pick up Sam at his babysitter’s. I’m a runner and try to run in the neighborhood several nights a week before dinner, if it fits with everyone’s schedules and plans
for the evening. We eat dinner as a family, often with a friend joining us. After dinner,
we relax and play. I’m often back on the computer later in the evening, mostly doing email, journal work, and finishing up some work from the day. I’m usually relaxing and
settling down for the night by 10.
Dr. Kazak Provides the Following Recommendations for Persons Interested in
Joining Her Field
There will be many opportunities in child health. A strong grounding in clinical, child,
and family psychology during training is important as is seeking out experiences in pediatric settings. A breadth of experiences is important, including skills in clinical services, research and teaching. People with the ability to be flexible, who can work as
members and leaders of teams, and those who can readily see opportunities that transcend traditional disciplinary boundaries will continue to be very competitive in pediatric psychology.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 35
Clinical geropsychology maintains the same general mission as all fields of
clinical psychology with intention to further develop science, practice, and theory. This subspecialty focuses on the mental health of older adults and psychological service delivery for them. Section 2 (Clinical Geropsychology) of the
Society of Clinical Psychology (Division 12 of APA) is an organization dedicated to furthering this mission.
The meaning of the term older adults has changed over time, as general life
expectancy and the population of older individuals have increased. Now, psychologists have come to address different adult populations as the “young old”
for persons aged 65 to 74 years, “old old” for persons aged 75 to 85 years, and
“oldest old” for persons aged 85 years and older (Santrock, 1999). These distinctions are helpful in recognizing that different cohorts of individuals might
have similar experiences within groups, but not across groups.
In comparison to younger adults, the psychological care of older adults coinciding with normative or age-expected life events often requires greater attention to medically related problems, medication use and compliance,
medication or substance abuse, differential diagnoses (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease
versus Depression), neuropsychological phenomena, systemic issues (e.g.,
nursing or assisted home care, family involvement; insurance), and death and
dying issues. Generational experiences (cohort effects) and age-related cultural
variables are also critical considerations for the optimal care of this population.
Since older adults have increasingly become a more prevalent population in the
workforce and in the care for younger generations, attention to these issues as
they relate to older adults’ beliefs and cohort experiences also require psychologists to have specialty knowledge and sensitivity.
Empirically based protocols for the treatment of many psychological disorders are geared toward the general adult population. Research not specifically
targeting senior adults tends to focus on persons between the ages of 18 and 65:
18 as a lower limit to avoid difficulties in obtaining informed consent; 65 as
upper limit probably because this is the age of retirement and a marker for differential experiences between those older and younger. Also, it had been assumed
that psychotherapeutic interventions for older adults do not need to differ from
those of the average population (Thorp & Lynch, 2005), but practitioners find this
not to be true. Clinical geropsychologists have dedicated much effort to the modification of protocols intended for younger adults, and the development, testing,
and validation of new assessment tools and techniques, and interventions for
older adults. More work is needed in this area. Also, topics such as the impact of
social support, methods and location of treatment delivery, and patient and therapist variables related to the treatment and care of older adults need further exploration (Thorp & Lynch, 2005). Research on caregivng has also expanded to
investigate the impact of senior adult spouses caring for their partners as well as
caregivng issues specific to adult children, family members, and professionals.
Specialties by Disorder
Many practitioners and researchers specialize their practices by focusing on
populations of individuals who have their psychological disorders or intervention needs in common. In community mental health centers and primary care
36 Introduction
facilities, this practice is not always feasible; but in private practices and academic research, this tends to be the norm rather than the exception. Niche
practices can help practitioners secure a continual stream of referrals, and help
researchers make a significant impact in the identification, assessment, treatment, or advancement of theory for a target group.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) made categorization of individuals discrete
to distinguish between types of problems experienced by patients, although
many patients have coexisting disorders and problems. Practice directories,
training directories, and associations tend to index psychologists’ expertise according to DSM disorders and additional subgroups. Some psychologists primarily treat individuals with mood disorders, whereas others predominantly work
with patients who have personality disorders. Psychologists may specialize in
substance abuse, sexual dysfunctions, developmental disabilities, or neuropsychological disorders. In Box 2.2, Dr. Ronald Fudge, the Director of Substance
Abuse Services in a metropolitan VA hospital, explains his roles, responsibilities, and recommendations for this area of clinical practice and research.
Box 2.2 Highlights of a Contemporary Psychologist
Ronald C. Fudge, PhD
Dr. Fudge holds a doctoral degree from University of Georgia, and master’s
degrees from University of Bridgeport and Princeton University (psychophysiology). His predoctoral internship was in the New Jersey state psychology internship program, and his postdoctoral training was in Detroit, where he
continued psychophysiology and biofeedback training and research. He is currently licensed in the state of New York, and is an active member of the American Psychological Association and the Association for Behavioral and
Cognitive Therapies. While Dr. Fudge subscribes to Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy, and
the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, he has access to a vast library of substance abuse journals and other relevant titles in his workplace. He routinely attends APA and
ABCT conferences, and occasionally attends conferences of the Association of Black Psychologists,
and other meetings in New York City. Dr. Fudge explains his roles and responsibilities in his position as Director of Substance Abuse Services in a VA Hospital.
My current position is the Director of Substance Abuse Services in a metropolitan VA hospital. Substance abuse services include a residential program for individuals with severe
addiction problems and moderate or chronic medical issues. There is also an intensive
outpatient program that includes evenings and weekends, a methadone maintenance
clinic, a community outreach program located in several venues throughout New Jersey,
and a consultation and liaison service within the medical specialty hospital. As Director, I
am responsible for a staff of 25 people that include administrative assistants, Psychologists, Psychiatrist, Internists, a physician assistant, rehab techs, nurses, and social workers.
Job responsibilities and duties are wide ranging and at times challenging. As Overall
Director, I am responsible for program development and supervising the provision of
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 37
services. While a considerable amount of time is dedicated to administrative and related services, I also provide clinical oversight and supervision. Since the “buck” stops
at my desk, final clinical decisions are my responsibility. I also chair interdisciplinary
team meetings, supervise intakes, and act as community liaison in public affairs. It is
also part of my role as administrator to determine, monitor, and maintain the quality
of services. I also serve as the Mental Health Program Analyst ensuring the maintenance of departmental standards.
Probably the most enjoyable part of the position aside from direct clinical services is the
provision of supervision and training for Psychology and Social work interns, Medical
Students, and Residents. When time permits, I have provided supervision and collaboration on research and dissertation projects.
What makes the job most interesting is the challenge of serving a diverse population
with a wide variety of issues both prior to and as a result of substance abuse. Their
problems are often complicated by medical issues either as a result of substance use or
from other causes. The challenge comes in affecting their lives in a very short period of
time. Regardless of misconceptions about substance abuse, marked psychological and
physical changes do result from treatment. The diverse etiologies and variety of people
with substance abuse problems call for a wide variety of clinical skills.
What Does Dr. Fudge Find to Be His Biggest Challenges in His Specialty or Position?
Substance abuse is closely related to the economy and the individual’s perception of
their place in society. In trying to provide treatment we are often faced with the interaction of poverty, childhood, and sexual abuse, racism, and the vagaries of economics.
I have often seen patients make major changes in their life only to be faced with the
hopelessness of their previous environment. It is difficult for some in this society where
some live very well and others have nothing and little hope for any change. When you
add in the devastating effect that substance abuse has on the physiognomy, permanent
positive change is extremely difficult.
What Does Dr. Fudge Like the Least about His Area of Specialty or Current Position?
As an administrator I am often faced with the sometimes contradictory goals presented
by the clinical needs of the client population and the administration and economic concerns of the organization. While it is not always the case that these two interests diverge, it occurs often enough to be a source of regular irritation. Additionally, there is
in substance abuse a conflict between the traditional view of substance abuse treatment, which is often based on experiential considerations, and the application of more
empirically tested interventions. I have been fortunate to have a fairly enlightened staff
that is open to almost any approach. In some other facilities, there is what amounts to
open warfare over treatment philosophy and goals.
A Day in the Life of Dr. Fudge
Dr. Fudge enjoys a full day beginning at 5 A.M. until he retires at 11 P.M. The bulk of his
professional work occurs between 7 A.M. and 4 P.M. In addition to his responsibilities
detailed previously, his day includes a 30- to 50-minute commute to or from work,
coaching several nights a week, household duties and family time, and time to practice
music, read, and “veg” in front of the “tube.”
38 Introduction
Dr. Fudge Provides the Following Recommendations for Persons Interested in
Joining His Field
First, I think that one should have a thorough understanding of the physiology of addiction, particularly the long-term effects of addiction and abuse. As new research on addiction and substance abuse emerges, the role of neurological changes needs to be
incorporated with behavior change. An awareness of a societal bias against substance
abusers is also important. There is a broad-based view that substance abusers are either
weak willed, or deficient in some way that allows them to become addicted to drugs.
Many in mental health often feel that working with substance abusers is the bottom of
the barrel.
Second, a more than passing acquaintance with medicine is something that a welltrained psychologist needs, especially in substance abuse. After 27 years in the field, I
feel that psychologists need to have a better background in physiology and a familiarity
with the psychological effects of medical problems. This should include enough lay
medicine to understand basic lab values and the behavioral consequences of medications and abnormal conditions. Anyone in the field should have enough of a medical
vocabulary and understanding to follow most medical charts. A medical dictionary and
Physician’s Desk Reference should be part of the psychologist’s library.
Many organizations coalesce their members around particular mental
health disorders or clinical health psychology topics. There are national organizations that focus on science, theory, and practice surrounding one or more diagnostic category: Anxiety Disorders Association of America, the Association for
the Treatment of Sexual Abusers, the Association for the Advancement of Mental Retardation, the Society of Behavioral Medicine, and the Treatment and Research Association (TARA) for Personality Disorders. This is only a small
sampling of the specialties categorized in this way. The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT) has Special Interest Groups (SIGs) in the
organization that also have organized interested members around diagnostic
categories, in addition to other categories. A sampling of the SIGs include the
following: Addictive Behaviors, Anxiety Disorders, Child and School-Related Issues, Developmental Disabilities, Insomnia and Other Sleep Disorders, Obesity
and Eating Disorders, Schizophrenia and Other Serious Mental Disorders. There
are Divisions in the American Psychological Association that focus on diagnostic
groups (e.g., personality, addictions) as well; however, these groups may not
focus exclusively on the criteria of clinical psychology. Associations relevant to
specialties in clinical psychology can be found in the Appendix (p. 53).
Clinical Health Psychology
Clinical psychologists whose distinct focus is on physical health problems and
the maintenance of physical health specialize in clinical health psychology. This
specialty attends to the interface between behavior and health. Clinical health
psychologists adopt a biopsychosocial model of health and illness and believe
that attention to the mind-body relationship is critical to physical and mental
well-being. This field aims to apply scientific knowledge to “the promotion and
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 39
maintenance of health; the prevention, treatment and rehabilitation of illness
and disability; and the improvement of the health care system” (APA, 1997).
Services are provided to families, individuals, and the organization of health
care systems. Hospitals, medical practices (primary care and specialty practices), nursing homes, outpatient clinics, and rehabilitation centers are settings
in which clinical health psychologists might work.
Clinical health psychologists could ascribe to any theoretical orientation.
Most research in this field, however, promotes cognitive and behavioral approaches to resolving, stabilizing, minimizing, or preventing problems. Most
service is delivered in short-term individual psychotherapy, consultation, psychoeducation, or group formats. Services are also likely to be developed
through multidisciplinary collaboration or coordination of care. Organizations
that advance clinical health psychology practices and research include ABCT’s
Special Interest Group in Behavioral Medicine, the Society of Behavioral Medicine, and APA’s Division 38, Health Psychology.
Clinical health psychologists are involved in physical health care in research and clinical endeavors. They may help with any of the following problems: behavioral and psychological risk factors for disease, illness, or injury;
psychological factors secondary to disease, illness, or injury; somatic presentations of psychological disorders; and behavioral and psychological aspects of
medical procedures such as surgery, chemotherapy, and dental work in need of
attention because of the way psychological phenomena are thought to impact
physical health, or vice versa (Golden & Felgoise, 2005). Areas in which clinical health psychologists have had significant impact on the fields of medicine
and health care include obesity and eating disorders, oncology, HIV/AIDS, gastroenterology, cardiology, organ transplant, surgery, pain management, smoking and respiration (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]),
sleep medicine, and fertility and sexual functioning. In fact, clinical health psychology has made inroads in helping people deal with illness and maintenance
of health for all organ systems. Services are also often provided to family members who are either caring for persons with medical illnesses or are affected by
their loved ones’ health status.
Clinical Neuropsychology
Clinical neuropsychology is another specialty that warrants specific discussion
when considering focal areas in terms of disorder. Clinical neuropsychology
can be classified under the umbrella of clinical psychology, but is also recognized as a specialty of psychology (APA’s Division 40) in its own right. Clinical
neuropsychologists often differentiate themselves from clinical psychologists
although some engage in both general clinical psychology and neuropsychology
practice.
Clinical neuropsychology focuses on the scientific study of “brainbehavior relationships, and the clinical application of that knowledge to
human problems” (APA, Division 40, www.div40.org/body.html). The mission of the APA Division of Clinical Neuropsychology is to “promote the use
of scientific research to develop its knowledge base and clinical techniques,”
and to develop and promote “quality standards of professional training and
40 Introduction
practice” (Barr & Cole, 2007). Division 40 broadens the focus on neuropsychological phenomena beyond clinical psychology to include interdisciplinary
interest from other aspects of psychology (i.e., cognitive, school, forensic, developmental, clinical rehabilitation, physiological psychology). Within the
field of clinical psychology/clinical neuropsychology, a specialty of behavioral
neuropsychology has emerged. Horton (1979) defines behavioral neuropsychology as follows:
Essentially, behavioral neuropsychology may be defined as the application of behavior therapy techniques to problems of organically impaired individuals while
using a neuropsychological assessment and intervention perspective. This treatment philosophy assumes that inclusion of data from neuropsychological assessment strategies would be helpful in the formulation of hypotheses regarding
antecedent conditions (external or internal) for observed phenomena of psychopathology. (p. 20)
Clinical neuropsychology requires specialized training in addition to that of
general clinical psychology or clinical health psychology. Many doctoral training programs offer neuropsychology tracks or concentrations that include
specialized coursework, practica, and research experiences. Clinical neuropsychologists focus on assessment and diagnosis; behavioral neuropsychologists
emphasize problems of management, retraining, and rehabilitation (Horton,
2005). Patients who suffer from strokes, degenerative diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s
disease, Huntington’s chorea), traumatic brain injury, or neurological problems
secondary to other medical problems or treatment (e.g., chemotherapy) are typical clients of the clinical neuropsychologist. These specialists practice their profession in many settings: private practice, hospitals, rehabilitation centers,
nursing homes, and interdisciplinary outpatient clinics. Christopher Royer, PhD,
a neuropsychologist and Division Director of Psychology and Neuropsychology
at his facility, describes his work as a clinician, administrator, supervisor, and
professor in Box 2.3.
Box 2.3 Highlights of a Contemporary Psychologist
Christopher Royer, PhD
Dr. Royer is a neuropsychologist working in a rehabilitation center in Central
Pennsylvania, and also as a half-time core faculty member in a doctoral
program in clinical psychology at the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic
Medicine. A graduate of Widener University’s PsyD Program in Clinical Psychology, he holds a Certification of Neuropsychology specialty training from
this institution. Dr. Royer is a Pennsylvania Licensed Psychologist, and a
member of the American Psychological Association and Pennsylvania Psychological Association. His journal of choice is Archives of Neuropsychology.
Reflecting on his favorite and most challenging aspects of his clinical practice, he shares the following thoughts.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 41
There are two components that are truly rewarding in this specialty. First, it is a great
opportunity to use psychological and neuropsychological assessment techniques to understand the person with a wonderful breadth of data. I look forward to difficult diagnostic questions and using psychological instruments to help me tease out these
problems. Secondly, working with individuals who have medical conditions is highly
rewarding. There are so many areas to intervene, and patients learn new ways to cope,
manage their illnesses, and become empowered with using behavioral strategies rather
than more passive medical treatments.
The biggest challenges are never related to the patient, but always in the business
arena. That being said, working with patients who have potential bias, such as workers’
compensation claims and other litigation, offer the most difficult challenges.
What Does Dr. Royer Like the Least about His Area of Specialty?
There is a great deal of need to educate the professional and lay community about how
psychology interacts with the body and with medical practice. While I really enjoy this
process, it feels, at times, as if the community, particularly in this area of the country,
is less ready to accept a behavioral approach that is so weighted in terms of the physical
manifestations of illness.
A Day in the Life of Dr. Royer
My days are quite varied, which is part of my continued enjoyment of this career. In addition to my clinical work, I teach half time, and there are responsibilities that go with
that obligation which take up more or less of my time depending on the day or week.
Typically, my family wakes up around 6:30 A.M. We try to do as much the night before to
be ready for the next day so that the family can get those few extra minutes in the morning. Typically, I will try to review my personal e-mail in the morning, while holding my
clinical and school accounts until later in the day. After getting everyone fed, we take my
15-year-old son to school. On a day with reasonable weather, I will walk with my 11-
year-old daughter to school, and then on to work (about 1.9 miles). I am visually impaired and I do not drive, so on bad-weather days, my wife will do a lot of transporting.
My wife is a part-time visiting nurse, so my 5-year-old will go to preschool on those days.
Upon arriving at work, my first order of business is to review the mail and referrals
from the day before. As the director of the office, I have to ensure that business flows.
I take time to check work e-mail as well. Often in the morning, I will meet and interview a testing referral and then get them started with an intern for the actual testing.
I then see two therapy patients before lunch. About 85% of my patients have medical
issues, and often they are able to come in during the day, as unemployment is a big
part of medical problems. I use a variety of behavioral and motivational interviewing
techniques to help patients cope with their illness and life circumstances. At 11:30, I
eat a quick lunch and meet with the intern (doctoral student from Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine; PCOM) to see how the testing is going and make any
mid-course corrections in the protocol. I then review my school e-mail and try to do
some callbacks. The afternoon tends to be a mix of therapy clients, pain evaluations,
disability evaluations, dictating time, callback time, or consultation time for the hospital. My office is located in a medical rehab and long-term acute care setting, and we
consult with inpatients on a daily basis. Depending on the day, the last hour is either
42 Introduction
given to dictation or calls. Two days per week, I meet with the intern for formal supervision, although a lot of that occurs during the week. One afternoon per week, I leave
a bit early to teach class. I teach graduate students from the PsyD Program in Clinical
Psychology program at PCOM. In Harrisburg, there is a distance learning site to accommodate students in central Pennsylvania.
Evenings are also variable, and sometimes unpredictable. When there is school work to
be done (reading papers, dissertations, etc.), that is the time. Otherwise, I try to keep as
much work as possible at work, as family time is extremely important to all of us. Dinner is together, and then homework gets done. We have a large room where we all congregate to talk, play games, go online, watch movies, and so on. At some point, e-mail
is attended to again. Growing older, sleep is a nice end to the day!
Dr. Royer Provides the Following Recommendations for Persons Interested
in Joining His Field
Working with the medical population is a fantastic niche to be in. The need is great and
there is quite a bit of unexplored territory in terms of identifying and validating effective assessment and treatment strategies. For those considering neuropsychology or
health psychology, I would only caution that these are really entire fields of knowledge
and require a large amount of training in order to become competent. Finding graduate
and postgraduate specialty tracks allows one to really immerse oneself in the field.
Specialties by Personal Characteristics
Sometimes clients seek to find clinical psychologists who specialize in assessment or treatment of mental health problems in persons from identified minority groups. Some persons from gay, lesbian, transsexual, or transgendered
communities, feminists, those who hold spirituality or a specific religion as
central to their identity, or persons with diverse cultural backgrounds may prefer to obtain psychological services from persons who identify themselves as
having expertise in their area. Specializing in clinical psychology for persons
with such characteristics is often accomplished in less formal ways than that of
other specialties in that there are few programs with separate training tracks for
specific populations. However, all training programs should emphasize cultural
awareness and respect for individual diversity, and the importance of culturally
minded knowledge, skills, and professional attitudes.
Psychologists who become experts in the assessment, diagnosis, or treatment of one or more minority groups likely do so by focusing their research
(dissertation or postdoctoral work), literature review, clinical skills training
(workshops, practica, internship, supervision), consultation, and clinical practice on working with such populations. There are Special Interest Groups in the
ABCT organization that recognize these important specialties: African Americans in Behavior Therapy; Asian American Issues in Behavior Therapy and Research; Hispanic Issues in Behavior Therapy; Masculinity and Mental Health;
Native American Issues in Behavior Therapy and Research; Spiritual and Religious Issues in Behavior Change; Study of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgendered Issues; and Women’s Issues in Behavior Therapy. Likewise, the
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 43
Society of Clinical Psychology (APA Division 12) has two pertinent sections
that bring professionals together to discuss, study, and further some of the topics discussed here: Section 4: Clinical Psychology of Women, and Section 6:
Clinical Psychology of Ethnic Minorities. Gayle Iwamasa, PhD is a seasoned
professional who has had tremendous impact on the field of clinical psychology
through her leadership in national organizations (ABCT, APA) and publications
on multicultural competence. Her career embraces clinical, academic, and professional activities, as described in Box 2.4.
Box 2.4 Highlights of a Contemporary Psychologist
Gayle Iwamasa, PhD
Dr. Iwamasa holds a master’s degree in psychology and a doctoral degree in
clinical psychology from Purdue University. Her predoctoral internship and
postdoctoral training took place at University of California—San Francisco,
School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry. She interned in major rotations
in short-term inpatient services, psychiatric emergency services, short-term
cognitive behavioral therapy, and long-term psychodynamic therapy. She is an
associate professor at DePaul University in Indiana, and a licensed psychologist and health service provider in psychology in Indiana. She also maintains
a private practice conducting clinical assessments and psychotherapy. Dr. Iwamasa has held numerous leadership positions in national organizations, including the Association
for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, Asian American Psychological Association, and the
American Psychological Association, and has published and consulted widely on multicultural
competencies. Dr. Iwamasa highlights her most and least favorite aspects of her career.
What Does Dr. Iwamasa Like the Most about Her Area of Specialty?
I don’t do the same thing all the time. I teach undergraduate and graduate students,
conduct cognitive behavioral therapy, conduct psychological evaluations, supervise
master’s level therapists and doctoral students, conduct research in areas of my interest,
and do consulting within and outside of psychology.
What Does Dr. Iwamasa Like the Least about Her Area of Specialty?
Since I like to do a lot of things, being able to say no to projects that I’d like to do is difficult. What I like the least as a faculty member are the numerous meetings, as a therapist—too much paperwork!
Dr. Iwamasa Provides the Following Recommendations for Persons Interested in
Joining Her Field
Get as much training as you can while you are in school, as once you get out, you’ll realize just how much you don’t know and wish you did! Once your job and personal life
demands fill your day, you might not have the time and money necessary to pursue as
much education and training as you’d like.
44 Introduction
Dr Iwamasa recommends two journals of primary interest to her: Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, and Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology. Dr. Iwamasa strives for
personal and professional balance, values her friendships and prioritizes her family. She
relies on e-mail to accomplish much of her leadership and professional work, and it also
allows her to stay connected with friends and colleagues nationally and internationally.
Specialties by Stage of Intervention
Viewing psychological and biopsychosocial problems along a continuum from
the trigger of a problem through its extinction splinters the discipline of clinical
psychology into additional subspecialties. Clinical psychologists’ practices may
be concentrated in the areas of prevention, crisis management, trauma response, acute- or long-term intervention, and rehabilitation. Sometimes the
focus on these areas of practice is dictated by practitioners’ employment setting
(e.g., psychiatric emergency center, partial hospitalization program, rehabilitation hospital). Clinical psychologists who are primarily researchers, scholars, or
academicians may select any of these stages of intervention for further study on
particular populations. Persons interested in pediatric clinical psychology
might investigate approaches to primary prevention of obesity. Or, clinical psychologists might focus on the immediate crisis of experiencing, or psychological
sequelae to surviving natural disasters such as Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Prevention
Primary prevention generally refers to interventions or attempts to reduce the
probability that a mental or physical health problem will develop. Clinical
health psychologists who teach stress management and coping skills workshops
to employees of a large corporation may help prevent the development of anxiety or depressive disorders and subsequent time lost from absenteeism. Likewise, counseling children of impending divorcees may moderate potential
negative effects from parental separation.
Secondary prevention focuses on the early identification and treatment of
an existing disease (Llewelyn & Kennedy, 2003) or mental health disorder. Recognizing a child’s weaknesses in the classroom and timely diagnosis of attention
deficit disorder may increase the likelihood that the child will receive necessary
services to compensate or deal with those problems. Clinical psychologists aim
to help clients minimize negative intrapersonal, social, and occupational consequences resulting from psychological stressors or disorders.
Crisis Management and Intervention
Crisis management and intervention may be necessary at the individual, familial, societal, or even national level. On a personal or family level, clients might
experience a crisis caused by a sudden death or suicide in one’s family; one’s
own self-mutilating behavior or drug overdose and presentation to an emergency room; or domestic violence, rape, sexual harassment, or natural disaster
(e.g., fire or flood). Some of these events lead clients to appear in acute care
settings, whereas others are recipients of outreach efforts by mental health pro-
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 45
fessionals. Societal or national crises might include terrorism, hate crimes,
bombing, open firearms in schools, or other similar events. Clinical psychologists who have specialized training in crisis management and trauma intervention would be called to action for these clients. The intervention or support
given within the immediate time following the event is likely to differ greatly
from therapy rendered months after the occurrence. Clinical psychologists with
specialty in crisis and trauma intervention know when and how to intervene.
The Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies has Special Interest
Groups (SIGs) that focus on crisis and trauma topics: Disaster and Trauma, and
Child Maltreatment and Family Violence. The Society of Clinical Psychology
(APA, Div.12) also has a section (7) for professionals interested in furthering
knowledge, training, and clinical services for “Clinical Emergencies and Crises.”
Dr. Patricia Resick, a clinical psychologist, is renowned for her work in trauma
and crisis response. An innovator and pioneer in this area, Dr. Resick is a past
president of ABCT (2003 to 2004) among many other impressive accomplishments. She shares a sample of her workday and her perspectives on this area of
research and practice in Box 2.5.
Box 2.5 Highlights of a Contemporary Psychologist
Patricia Resick, PhD
Dr. Resick, a Missouri licensed psychologist, obtained her doctoral degree at
the University of Georgia. Her predoctoral internship training took place
at the Middlesex Hospital Medical School in London, and at the VA in
Charleston, South Carolina. Since her specialty in trauma response did not
exist, her early experiences in the field came through volunteer work as one of
the first rape crisis counselors in the United States. In this position, she was
“on call” and went to the emergency room if a rape victim was brought to the
hospital. Postdoctoral fellowships were not required at the time her degree
was granted, so she took her first position as an assistant professor at the University of South Dakota. Dr. Resick shares her experiences and insights about her career working
in trauma response.
Dr. Resick is an active member in the American Psychological Association, the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, and the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. Her
journals of choice include Journal of Clinical and Consulting Psychology, Journal of Applied Psychology, Behavior Therapy, Cognitive and Behavior Therapy, Journal of Traumatic Stress, and Psychology of Women Quarterly.
What Does Dr. Resick Like the Most and the Least about Her Area of Specialty?
I have never been bored by my area of specialty. When I began, nothing was known
about the effects of trauma on symptoms and functioning, natural recovery or how to
treat these symptoms. Over the past 3 decades, we have learned a great deal, but there
is still much to be learned. I find the topic endlessly fascinating and believe that the
topic is important.
46 Introduction
Regarding my job position, I love the people I work with. They are smart, hardworking,
full of ideas, and dedicated to quality research and clinical work. In my current position
at the National Center for PTSD, I have the potential to have an impact on improving
the quality of care given to those who have served our country and been harmed by
this service, veterans with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
What I like the least is that the VA is a very large health care system and a very large
bureaucracy. There are, what feels at times, unnecessary restrictions, rules, and repeated trainings. Sometimes it seems like I fill out so many productivity reports that it
actually interferes with my productivity.
What Does Dr. Resick Find to Be Her Biggest Challenges in Her Specialty or Position?
Our biggest challenge is to continue producing quality research and excellent care
when resources are becoming stretched under current national circumstances.
A Day in the Life of Dr. Resick
5:30 A.M. Wake up.
7:00 Leave for work (my husband and I commute together and we listen
to a book on tape).
8:00 Arrive at work.
8:15 to 9:00 Check and respond to overnight e-mail and prepare for meetings.
9:00 to 11:00 Work on a PowerPoint presentation for a conference later in the
week (interrupted by e-mail, people dropping in to ask questions,
and a phone call).
11:00 to 12:00 Take a conference call about a book I am coediting.
12:00 to 1:00 Eat lunch at desk while working on responding to e-mail.
1:00 to 2:00 Take conference call with other Directors of the National Center for
PTSD. We talk about Director’s recent visit to VA Central Office in
Washington and our new efforts to respond to veterans with PTSD,
outreach to military sites.
2:00 to 2:30 Junior staff member stops by to get some feedback on a revision of a
grant proposal.
2:30 to 3:00 Check more e-mail and spend a few more minutes on presentation.
3:00 to 4:00 Discuss group therapy supervision by way of conference call. Therapists from two sites of the national center for PTSD are on the phone
discussing the use of cognitive processing therapy (CPT) for their
clients.
4:00 to 5:00 Discuss local CPT supervision. Staff members, postdoctoral fellows,
and interns attend.
5:00 to 5:30 Check last e-mails and close up for the evening.
5:30 to 6:30 Drive home. We discuss our days and then listen to more book on
tape.
6:30 to 7:30 Prepare and eat dinner.
8:00 to 9:00 Exercise.
9:00 to 11:00 Clean out and respond to e-mail while watching TV.
11:20 Bed.
As you can tell, I do a lot of my work on e-mail. I work on projects with many people
at different sites, edit manuscripts, answer questions, file reports, and do many admin-
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 47
istrative duties. E-mail saves us from having as many meetings, but I read and respond
to about 150 e-mails a day.
Dr. Resick Provides the Following Recommendations for Persons Interested
in Joining Her Field
Before deciding, get some volunteer experience with traumatized populations such as
at a rape crisis center, domestic violence program, or victim assistance agency. Make
sure that you can handle hearing about traumatic events without being overwhelmed
by the stories. If you think you might be interested in research, do the same—get some
experience at your university, or at another research program.
At the national level, the American Psychological Association organized
the Disaster Response Network (DRN) through local and regional psychological
associations in 1992 to provide a mechanism through which psychologists can
volunteer to respond to local and national disasters and other traumatic events.
Through this organization, psychologists came together to aid Americans in
coping with the Oklahoma City bombing, Hurricanes Andrew and Katrina,
9/11, and other events. This volunteer network provides pro bono services to
communities affected by trauma, crisis, and disaster, and provides access to disaster mental health training for its members. The DRN collaborates with other
organizations that serve the same purpose of providing support during these
events. Its primary function is to participate in joint activities with the American Red Cross (APA, 2006).
Acute or Long-Term Intervention
Some may argue that acute and long-term intervention describes the bulk of
what most clinical practitioners do, so therefore, they may not constitute specialties within the field. However, those who practice in emergency room settings, psychiatric hospitals, or partial programs would argue that the skills used
in these settings differ from those used in others. In acute psychiatric settings,
psychologists’ practices might emphasize diagnostic skills, assessment and referral practices, and crisis intervention. Clinicians must write reports quickly
and efficiently, and be skilled at working with a wide variety of clients and
other health care professionals. Clients who use acute psychiatric services are
diverse in mental health status, psychological problems, and other personal
characteristics.
Long-term interventions could pertain to the practice of psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy, treatment of severely mentally ill or developmentally disabled individuals, or interventions geared toward persons with
personality disorders, multiple clinical diagnoses, or pervasive difficulties.
Given the movement in health care toward brief psychotherapy, a specialty in
long-term interventions is least likely to classify many psychologists today. It is
more likely that practice in a particular setting (e.g., psychiatric hospital) or
with a particular population (e.g., schizophrenic patients) would dictate who
uses long-term treatment interventions most often.
48 Introduction
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation psychology is operationally defined this way by Division 22:
[T]he study and application of psychosocial principles on behalf of persons who
have physical, sensory, cognitive, developmental or emotional disabilities. . . . Rehabilitation psychologists work to foster personal and social growth of individuals
with disabilities using a perspective that emphasizes the whole person and optimal
use of assets. Rehabilitation psychologists pursue goals of improving rehabilitation
practices and changing environments to broaden opportunities available to persons with disabilities in social relationships, employment, education, community
and leisure activities. (Scherer et al., n.d.)
Psychologists specializing in rehabilitation psychology with training in
clinical psychology may work with spinal-cord injured patients, persons
with Lou Gehrig’s disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), traumatic brain
injuries, or developmental disabilities, as examples. Their practice may be in
medical settings, academic institutions, political positions, administration,
or community services. Careers in rehabilitation psychology can take the
form of clinical practice, research, teaching, or administration. Again, many
specialties of clinical psychology overlap in the populations addressed,
services provided, or settings involved. For example, similarities between
clinical health psychology and rehabilitation psychology are evident,
although there are some distinct differences between these two fields in
their missions.
Division 22 of APA is dedicated to rehabilitation psychology. The purpose of this division is to “bring together all APA members interested in the
psychological aspects of disability and rehabilitation, to educate the public
on issues related to disability and rehabilitation, and to develop high standards and practices for professional psychologists who work in this field”
(APA, n.d.-c). In working toward this mission, clinical psychologists join colleagues from public policy psychology, developmental psychology, health
psychology, community psychology, physiological psychology, and other
fields. It is possible and likely that neuropsychologists and clinical health
psychologists practice within the field of rehabilitation psychology.
Specialties by Therapeutic Modality
In most doctoral training programs in psychology, students are taught about
psychopathology and well-being, and about individual assessment and treatment of children and adults. Assessment is a core component of clinical psychology that differentiates the abilities of psychologists from other mental
health professionals. Some psychologists do evaluations and assessments as the
staple practice of their profession. Assessments are critical to all treatment
planning, but are often required for forensic purposes, educational assistance
programs, supplemental insurance evaluations, disability determinations, and
differential diagnosis, to name a few. Not all clinical psychologists maintain
competency in objective and projective testing, and therefore, they, too, rely on
colleagues with this expertise.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 49
Doctoral-level elective courses in graduate programs often are available in
group, family, or couples therapy although few doctoral programs in clinical
psychology directly offer extensive specialty training in these treatment modalities. Psychologists establish their expertise in providing group, family, or couples therapy through some didactic training, but largely develop their skills
through supervised clinical experience. Typically, psychologists who deliver
treatment in groups, family, or couples therapy do so for specific populations in
which they specialize: medically ill, relationship satisfaction, depressed individuals, and others.
Specialties by Settings
Graduate training is usually general in that it prepares graduates to practice
psychology in a variety of settings for diverse populations. As many psychologists’ careers develop, their competencies are likely to expand within their
specialty area, and fade in others. Psychologists who practice in outpatient
community mental health might have completely different philosophies
about note-taking, client retention, and treatment planning than academic
psychologists who typically treat volunteer clients as part of their research
programs. A greater contrast might be found by comparing clinical psychologists who are employed in hospital settings with those who work in the forensic arena. These two groups of psychologists tend to have different knowledge
bases, competencies, and practices. Thus, psychologists are likely to follow
professional literature and conferences that pertain to their daily activities
and are less likely to maintain awareness of distal practices. The following is a
list of common settings in which clinical psychologists work: inpatient mental
health facilities, outpatient private or community mental health practices, inpatient/outpatient medical settings (hospitals, physician or holistic health care
practices), corporate settings, educational/academic settings, forensic settings,
research settings, or political settings. The roles and functions of clinical psychologists in these settings differ extensively. Yet, science, theory, and practice
are common themes in all subspecialties of clinical psychology and can be applied or explored in any of these settings.
Forensic Psychology
Clinical forensic psychologists dedicate their career to focusing on the interface
between law and psychology, and the application of theory, principles, and research from both disciplines. Forensic psychologists work within prison systems, in private practices, academic settings, legal settings, or government.
Educating the public and both professions about law and psychology is also a
critical role for these specialists.
Assessment is often a core component of forensic psychology practices.
Forensic psychologists may conduct assessments to evaluate child or senioradult custody cases, to determine competency to stand trial or be one’s own
guardian, or to assess fitness for duty. Within the court system, these psychologists are involved in jury selection and providing expert testimony. The Federal
50 Introduction
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) also seeks clinical forensic psychologists in profiling criminals, and carrying out governmental work requiring expertise in
clinical psychology. Applied forensic intervention practice might involve
psychotherapy for persons remanded to treatment by the courts, such as sex offenders or professionals with addictive disorders. In addition, forensic psychologists often become involved in helping with state and national legislation of
licensure and other field-related policies.
Like other specialties in clinical psychology, forensic psychologists hold
academic appointments and conduct research on topics interfacing psychology
and the law. Psychologists with expertise in forensic psychology often teach
ethics courses and specialty topics regarding decision making, law, and clinical
populations. Training in forensic psychology is achieved either through specialty track training in a clinical psychology doctoral program, or by acquiring
a doctorate in clinical psychology and a separate law degree. Some training
programs offer joint degrees in law (JD) and psychology (PhD or PsyD). The
APA Division 41 is the American Psychology-Law Society, and is dedicated to
the “understanding of law and legal institutions, the education of psychologists in legal matters and law personnel in psychological matters, and the application of psychology in the legal system” (APA, n.d.-a). Dr. Samuel Knapp
maintains a unique position in the field of forensic psychology, but the impact
of his work reaches across all practice areas of psychology. Highlights of his
daily practice are exhibited in Box 2.6.
Box 2.6 Highlights of a Contemporary Psychologist
Samuel Knapp, PhD
Dr. Knapp holds a master’s degree in psychology from Indiana University of
Pennsylvania (1976), and a doctorate from Lehigh University (1982). His
predoctoral internship training was at the Lehigh University Counseling
Center. Dr. Knapp’s practice of forensic psychology is unique in that he works
for the Pennsylvania State Board of Psychology.
Dr. Knapp is a member of numerous organizations: American Psychological
Association—Fellow; Division 29 (Psychotherapy); Division 31 (State,
Provincial, Territorial Psychological Associations); Division 36 (Religion and
Psychology); Asian American Psychological Association; Pennsylvania Psychological Association (PPA); and Society for Ethics Across the Curriculum.
He attends annual conventions of the American Psychological Association and the Pennsylvania
Psychological Association, and subscribes to numerous professional publications to stay abreast of
the literature: Professional Psychology: Research and Practice; Ethics and Behavior; International Journal of Religion and Psychology; Ethics and Across the Curriculum; Scientific American: Mind; and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training. Dr.
Knapp strives for balance in his life by walking his dogs, enjoying relaxing activities with his wife
and his adult children, or reading science fiction.
Here he shares some of his favorite aspects of his job, as well as its greatest challenges.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 51
What Does Dr. Knapp Like the Most about His Area of Specialty?
The job responsibilities that I like most include direct consultation with members on
legal and ethical issues, writing articles, and working with specific committees.
Consultation/Education/Committee Work
Some of the programs developed by the State Board of Psychology include the creation of an article bank of common professional and ethical problems encountered by
our members that are placed on the PPA web site. We have also published a book,
Pennsylvania Law and Psychology (now in its fourth edition) that graduate programs
often use.
We have a comprehensive program of continuing education, especially in the areas of
ethics and professional issues. These include small-group collaborative learning programs, small group interactive programs in specialties (such as psychologists working
in child custody areas, in college counseling centers, with religious professionals, in
prisons or correctional facilities), and a small group decision-making program where
we have collected pre- and posttest data on the respondents and are currently analyzing the data to determine if the CE program led to an actual improvement in ethical
decision-making ability. In addition to their didactic value, these small group workshops help psychologists get to know other psychologists and help create a sense of
community.
With assistance of the PPA Ethics Committee, we have created a series of home studies
on ethics that is designed to cover the range of common ethical issues encountered by
psychologists. In my role, I also consult with PPA members by helping to problem-solve
and answering over 2,000 e-mails and 1,000 phone calls annually regarding ethical
questions or dilemmas.
The perspective we take in ethics education is “positive ethics,” whereby we try to use
ethics to help psychologists reach their highest level of performance, as opposed to
merely avoiding disciplinary sanctions. I am fortunate to have a “gaggle” of colleagues
who share this perspective and who write and teach with this orientation.
Articles
I also write articles for the Pennsylvania Psychologist. I try to make these articles down to
earth and relevant for practicing psychologists. On my own time, I write articles for
professional publications (I have about 100 peer-reviewed articles so far). Sometimes I
adapt materials from my personal writing for publication in the Pennsylvania Psychologist
and vice versa.
What Does Dr. Knapp Find to Be His Biggest Challenges in His Specialty or Position?
The biggest challenge is dealing with insurance and managed care companies. The patient protection laws are weak and there are many loopholes by which patients are
denied the benefits they were promised in their contracts. I spend a lot of time with
members (and also government agencies and insurers) on insurance and reimbursement issues.
52 Introduction
Summary: Making the Right Choices for You
Clinical psychology, a specialty within the overarching field of psychology, also
has many subspecialties. Clinical psychologies have a common interest in the
integration of science, theory, and practice with the mission of advancing the
field for the betterment of the profession and society. A key facet to all specialties within clinical psychology is the constant interchange of ideas between
clinical science and the application of that science. Thus, scientist-practitioners,
practitioner-scholars, educators, administrators, and all others who hold true to
clinical psychology need to stay abreast of current literature, movements in the
field, government and politics related to the specialty areas, and feedback from
clients who use clinical psychology services and information.
In this chapter, the practices of clinical psychologists have been magnified
to illustrate how specialized the subfields of clinical psychology have become.
With so many choices, and so many overlapping missions and purposes, how
do you make sense of it all? How do you choose a career path? If you are a doctoral student, you may soon be asked to name your dissertation topic, which
will associate you with a particular expertise. In master’s training, your clinical
experiences and supervision during graduate school may dictate what jobs you
can acquire when you complete your degree. Which way should you go?
Which way should you turn on this winding and expansive road of clinical psychology? This summary can help you understand your options among the
many subdisciplines described in this chapter.
First, by selecting your graduate training program, it is likely that you have
chosen or will soon focus on a particular theoretical orientation from which you
will learn to conceptualize clients, hypothesize about research questions, or interpret the thoughts and behaviors of persons you encounter. You have already
begun to define your expertise in clinical psychology. As you progress through
your training, many of your courses will delve into life span issues, psychopathology, ethics, cultural and individual diversity, research, and perhaps assessment
and intervention. Which courses have excited you the most or you are most
looking forward to? As you work through each course, use paper assignments as
opportunities to learn about patient populations or practice settings that you
may not be discussing at length in class. Or, if you are already a practitioner,
think about the clients who have interested you the most or piqued your curiosity. What do you find yourself wanting to learn more about? This is where the
specialties begin to develop.
For some, psychopathology in the form of severe mental illness or Axis II
personalities is most fascinating. For others, no one patient population stands
out—the diversity of mental health issues, perhaps among the general community, is most intriguing. One psychologist-in-training gears practicum and internship choices toward working exclusively with schizophrenic patients and
creates a dissertation on a particular nuance of treatment for these individuals.
For another trainee, the medical setting and working with physically ill individuals might seem to be her true calling. This individual might seek diversified
training opportunities to prepare to work with a variety of patient populations
in hospitals, outpatient, or primary care settings.
The Fields of Clinical Psychology 53
Thus far on this journey, perhaps you have selected a patient population
or setting for practice. Within these choices lie many more. Do you have the
stamina to make a difference in a crisis situation, to help minimize the impact
of a traumatic event? Do you excel in establishing long-standing personal relationships that could aid in complicated long-term treatment of persons who
may not otherwise trust people they encounter? Where do you think you are
likely to make a difference?
Many psychologists develop expertise around particular techniques and
skills, such as stress management and relaxation training, meditation practices,
self-control strategies, cognitive restructuring, or contingency management.
The skills you develop may also dictate the career you create for yourself. Some
techniques and skill sets are geared more toward a specific setting than toward
others, or toward particular patient populations rather than others. This is yet
another aspect of training to consider.
As you reflect on this chapter, you may recognize that there are many
ways to select your specialty areas within clinical psychology, if you choose to
specialize at all. To come up with a plan for your future career, you may want
to consider which modality (individual, couples, family, groups) of treatment
you most enjoy. Is there a particular population (e.g., children, adults, senior
adults, medical patients, underserved immigrants) to which you hope to dedicate your work? Are there certain human pathologies that you would most
like to learn more about? Finally, in what setting do you believe you are most
likely to thrive? You will find the answers to these questions in bits and pieces
of your experiences along the way as you continue your training journey. If
you attend to these guideposts along the way, you will find your direction. Remember that the answers are not mutually exclusive, nor are the careers in
the subspecialties. Many paths run parallel or concurrent. Many psychologists
have fulfilling careers by retaining generalist practitioner skills in assessment
and intervention for the service of diagnostically and individually diverse
clients. Clinical psychologists commonly hold teaching, administrative, clinical, and research positions in one stage of their career. The beauty of a career
in clinical psychology is that your choices are almost endless!




We live in a society that comprises many cultural elements, yet our clinical assumptions are often based on information from limited subgroups or limited contexts. What we know about human behavior frequently
lacks a broad cultural framework. To be effective with an increasingly diverse
population, our clinical interventions need to be grounded in cultural dynamics. This begins with sensitivity to culture as a primary psychological and social
variable. By increasing our consciousness and studying the workings of culture,
we can open the door to deeper understanding and more effective interventions in our pluralistic society.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Understand the importance of cultural context.
• Describe current patterns and future trends among major population
groups.
• Understand common terminology related to culture, ethnicity, and diversity.
• Recognize key cognitive and social processes that shape cultural dynamics.
• Understand the ways that culture is incorporated into personal identity.
• Describe the ethical foundations of culturally competent practice.
• List four important action strategies for building cultural competence.
A clinical case example illustrates various points throughout the chapter.
56 Introduction
Cultural Competence as Fundamental Practice
In the revisions of the APA Ethics Code for psychologists published in 2002, the
notion of competence in understanding and working with cultural differences
in both clinical and research settings went from aspiration to a specifically detailed standard for expected professional conduct (APA, 2002, 2.01 [b]). This
standard recognizes that an understanding of factors associated with age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, religion, sexual
orientation, disability, language, or socioeconomic status may be essential for
effective implementation of service or research. Other ethical principles emphasize that respect for others’ rights and dignity (APA, 2002, Principle E), jusClinical Example: Doris (Vignette 1)
Doris is a 45-year-old African American woman who is married, has two
children, and holds an administrative
position in a large academic institution.
Despite a demanding schedule, her
lifestyle is sedentary, and she is not involved in any systematic form of exercise. Although her employer has a
sophisticated employee wellness program that includes various opportunities for health improvements and even
financial incentives for wellness efforts,
she does not take advantage of these
options. In fact, Doris seems to avoid
attending to her health. She went for a
medical checkup a few years ago only
because persistent headaches were interfering with her work. In this evaluation, it was discovered that she had
hypertension (high blood pressure) and
Type II (adult onset) diabetes.
Her physician prescribed antihypertensive medication and dietary management of the diabetes. The doctor noted
several important health risks in addition to her lack of exercise: a high fat
diet; smoking; a family history of hypertension and heart disease; and a body
mass index (BMI—a measure of her
overall body weight in proportion to
her height) greater than 30, classifying
her as obese. He encouraged her to stop
smoking and lose weight, and insisted
that she have a follow-up consultation
with a diabetes management clinic.
Doris initially complied with taking
the antihypertensive medication, but she
was inconsistent in adhering to the medication regimen. She also complied with
the recommendation for the diabetes
clinic consult. During her first visit, she
talked briefly with a diabetes health care
team that included a physician, a nurse
practitioner, a nutritionist, a social
worker, and a psychologist. They encouraged her to begin regular exercise, to develop a plan for smoking cessation, to
modify her diet according to the guidelines offered by the nutritionist, and to
return for regular follow-up visits at the
diabetes clinic to monitor her progress.
Doris appreciated their kindly manner,
but did not follow through on any of
their suggestions, and did not keep any
follow-up appointments.
Can you suggest why Doris made the
two office visits but did not engage in
the recommended behavioral changes
or follow-up visits? Do you think that
any aspect of culture might have played
a role in this outcome? We discuss
Doris periodically throughout the chapter to illustrate the interaction between
culture, clinical and behavioral problems, and the methods and strategies of
intervention.
Working with Cultural Diversity 57
tice and equality of service to all persons (Principle D), and the safeguarding of
the rights and welfare of those directly and indirectly affected by our work
(Principle A) are essential aspirations for all professional decisions and judgments in the field of psychology.
Understanding cultural context should not be marginalized as an optional
or special interest pursuit, but instead valued as a basic component of professional competence. Cultural context is important in clinical work because cultural variables affect the validity of assessment and diagnosis, the applicability
of research results, the quality of a therapeutic alliance, the development of a
treatment plan, and the overall effectiveness of treatment delivered. Traditional
psychological services are often inadequate for members of ethnic minority
groups, particularly in terms of cultural and linguistic fit (S. Sue, 1998). At the
same time, we have a growing multiethnic population in the United States
(Aponte & Crouch, 2000; U.S. Census Bureau, 2001).
The notion of cultural competence incorporates knowledge, skills, and attitudes. S. Sue (1998) defines cultural competence as “the belief that people
should not only appreciate and recognize other cultural groups, but be able to
effectively work with them” (p. 440). In this chapter, we cover population
trends, terminology, and cultural processes to help you recognize differences,
and summarize some key strategies for working effectively with cultural variables in a clinical setting.
The Diverse People of the United States
The people of the United States are becoming an increasingly varied population
in terms of ethnic and cultural heritage (see Figure 3.1). Demographic trends
based on the population composition as of the 2000 U.S. Census predict that by
the middle of this century (2050), the Caucasian majority will shrink to 50%,
with other racial/ethnic groups comprising the remaining 50% in varying degrees. Currently, approximately 67% of the U.S. population is identified as
White. Although categories overlap to some extent as individuals may report
Caucasian Other Native Alaskan/Indian
Asian/Pacific
Hispanic
African American
Figure 3.1
United States
Demographic
Composition
in 2000
58 Introduction
more than one racial affiliation, the breakdown of the remaining 33% is as follows: 13% African American, 13% Hispanic, 4.5% Asian/Pacific Islander,
1.5% American Indian or Alaskan Native, and 7% of some other race (APA,
2003; U.S. Census Bureau, 2001). There also appears to be an increasing
birthrate of biracial individuals, as 42% of those who endorsed more than one
race in the 2000 census were under the age of 18.
Historically, the United States has been a country with a significant White
majority, with African Americans comprising the largest minority, and other
racial/ethnic groups having much smaller presence. Now, there is greater diversity, and in the future we can expect even more heterogeneity among the people. Beyond increasing racial and ethnic variance, we also expect more age
variance, as longevity increases. Now, approximately 12% of the population is
age 65 or older, but that is expected to grow to 21% by mid-century. There will
also be a corresponding increase in the oldest ages, with those 85 and beyond
comprising 5% of the population, compared with 1.5% as of the year 2000
(Armas, 2004, as cited in “Whites’ Majority Steadily Shrinking,” 2004).
Clinical science and practice has significant challenges ahead in understanding and relating to diverse clinical populations and appreciating the possible social and personal implications of these broad cultural shifts. We can
reasonably anticipate that tensions, challenges, and opportunities will be embedded in this increasingly heterogeneous society. The environment as we now
know it will be significantly changed, although we cannot fully predict the impact of those changes. Clinicians now entering the field, including those who
will complete their training in the years between 2010 and 2020, will be the
providers working with this changing population over the bulk of their career
as we progress toward the predicted patterns of 2050. Major population trends
to anticipate are summarized in Table 3.1.
As the population changes, we may also see corresponding shifts in the
clinical problems that precipitate a referral to psychological treatment. This
may be particularly true for problems that disproportionately affect certain
groups. There are many potential examples of problems associated with population groups such as persons who are elderly, disabled, homeless, and gay/lesbian. Whether these problems are adequately conceptualized and treated
depends in part on the social impact of these concerns and the visible advocacy
on behalf of the minority group affected. Culturally sensitive research can help
us to pinpoint relevant factors that influence the onset, maintenance, or outTable 3.1 Major Demographic Trends Expected between 2010
and 2050
• The very elderly (over 85) will more than double in number.
• Those over age 65 will grow to more than 20% of the population.
• A young biracial cohort will contribute to significant growth in ethnically blended
cultures.
• The Caucasian majority will continue to shrink.
• Other racial/ethnic groups will increase in varying degrees.
Working with Cultural Diversity 59
come of pressing clinical and behavioral problems, and thus increase the effectiveness of our interventions.
Common Terminology
Defining terms and concepts is important in establishing a systematic approach for
training, research, and development of a common understanding (see Table 3.2).
As outlined in the APA Multicultural Guidelines (2003), the terms of culture,
race, ethnicity, multiculturalism, and diversity should be delineated for clear and
consistent use. Diversity is the most encompassing term, referring to the multiple
aspects of a person’s social identity—race, ethnicity, language, sexual orientation,
gender, age, disability, economic status, education, religious/spiritual affiliation,
and other social roles. When we describe these aspects of a person’s social identity, we are describing the individual’s social diversity. The term multiculturalism is
often used interchangeably with diversity to refer to the dimensions relevant to
identity. In the APA Guidelines, however, the term is used precisely and refers to
interactions between racial or ethnic groups in the United States. In this chapter,
we follow this distinction and discuss the diverse aspects of individual clients and
encourage multicultural experiences as a means of increasing cultural competence.
Although the term race is formally defined as a genealogical line (American
Heritage, 1994), psychological observers have noted that biological racial categories and phenotypic characteristics have more within-group variation than
Table 3.2 Common Terminology for Working with Diversity
Term Meaning
Diversity Multiple aspects of personal/social identity (race,
ethnicity, language, sexual orientation, gender, age,
disability, economic status, education, religious/spiritual
orientation, social roles)
Multicultural Variables relevant to personal/social identity; interchangeable with diversity
Race/ethnicity Group heritage of common and distinctive features;
consensual definition lacking
Ethnocentricism Belief in superiority of one ethnic group, usually one’s
own
Culture Belief systems and value orientations that shape a way
of living through norms, practices, customs, organizations, psychological processes, and social institutions
Psychological acculturation Learning the beliefs, values, and practices that characterize a new culture and determining a personal degree of
acceptance or identification
60 Introduction
between-group variation, and that a consensual definition of race does not
exist (Helms & Cook, 1999). A definition of race within the field of psychology
is a socially constructed category to which individuals are assigned on the basis
of physical characteristics such as skin color (APA, 2003). Similarly, ethnicity
does not have a consensus definition. APA Guidelines refer to ethnicity as “the
acceptance of the group mores and practices of one’s culture of origin and the
concomitant sense of belonging,” (p. 380). The Guidelines also note that individuals with multiple ethnic identities may operate with different salience
at different times. Similarly, the American Heritage Dictionary (1994) defines
“ethnic” as a group heritage of common and distinctive racial, national, religious, linguistic, or cultural features. Of note in this context is the common
term ethnocentricism, which is the belief in the superiority of one’s own ethnic or
other culturally based group compared with other ethnic or other culturally
based groups.
Finally, culture is defined as the belief systems and value orientations that
influence customs, norms, practices, psychological processes, organizations,
and social institutions (APA, 2003, p. 380). Culture includes a way of living and
viewing the rest of the world that is influenced and shaped by historical, economic, ecological, and political forces. As Triandis (1995) aptly states, “Culture
is to society what memory is to the person” (p. 341). It specifies ways to think
about self and social behavior that produce functional designs for living. As
Kaschak (1992) points out, culture includes the rules for perception and organization of experiences, both interpersonal, and intrapersonal. Thus, the
meaning of any experience or practice is embedded within the context of culture. Cultural socialization helps to determine the salience of experiences related to the private self (thoughts related to traits, states, or actions of oneself,
or what “I” see); the public self (thoughts related to the view of oneself from a
generalized other or what “they” see of me); or the collective self (thoughts
about what a group of specific others think, such as what “the family” or “my
colleagues” think of me). Persons raised in the culture of East Asia, for example, will pay more attention and think more often of their collective self than
people with a European or North American background (Triandis, 1995).
Although there are many variables within a culture, all individuals have a
cultural heritage, and an ongoing cultural identity. A person who has contact
with another culture may experience psychological acculturation, or the internal
modification of beliefs, values, and other aspects of behavior as a result of this
interaction. This modification is typically an uneven process where beliefs or
values and behaviors do not shift in a uniform manner, but rather through a series of interactions, highly influenced by acculturation attitudes and strategies
(Berry, 1995). Both self and culture are dynamic, ever-changing across time
and different environments, moving toward complexity when acculturation is
effective, and shifting back toward simplification when complexity becomes
very high or unworkable (Triandis, 1995).
An appreciation of diversity will help us better understand individual differences, both within and between groups. Culture is a mechanism that shapes
individual and group identity by systematizing the beliefs and values that organize and direct perceptions, thoughts, actions, and indeed the very definition of
self and reality for its constituents. Cultural belief systems, value orientation, and
Working with Cultural Diversity 61
common practices are, in turn, shaped by history, politics, economics, and the interaction of all these forces. As individuals are exposed to and become involved
with different groups, they will likely experience psychological acculturation,
where they develop some understanding and accept or adopt characteristics of
the new group, including the salience of a private, public, or collective self. Multicultural experiences thus contribute to the diverse aspects of anyone’s social
identity. To be effective as clinicians, educators, and scientists, we need to be familiar with these diverse aspects of identity (APA, 2000a). Both race and ethnicity are socially constructed ways of grouping large numbers of people. In reality,
most racial or ethnic categories incorporate many individual differences within
the group, so that we must use great caution in considering any cultural generalizations on this basis. It is relevant, however, to consider racial and ethnic identity in a context of cultural diversity (Table 3.2).
Attunement to Cultural Diversity in Clinical Context
Many current resources emphasize two primary perspectives on culture in the
context of clinical practice: knowledge of one’s own cultural heritage and varying social identities, and knowledge of other cultures (APA, 2003, p. 378; see
also Hansen, Pepitone-Arreola-Rockwell, & Greene, 2000; Hays, 2001). An understanding of yourself provides grounding in internal awareness of culture
and its influence on perceptions and values, as well as recognition of your stimulus value to others and the potential limitations or even biases in working
with differing cultures. Knowledge of other cultures can reduce limitations or
potential biases although this is a volitional process and will not happen automatically with a bit of information or slight exposure.
Ask yourself to think about at least one cultural institution and its practices that you believe had a significant impact on your childhood or adolescence. Maybe you will think about growing up in a military family and how
that affiliation affected your geographic mobility and your sense of patriotism
and service. Or you might think about your ethnic background and how your
family connected with various social activities and events associated with this
ethnicity. Maybe you continue to treasure and practice these traditions. Perhaps the educational system was a prominent aspect of your cultural development, and you spent long hours studying to achieve academic success. You
worried about your performance, but your excellent grades were highly rewarded, and your family made a major fuss over your graduation.
Do you think that your experiences with this particular cultural institution and its practices fostered your sense of belonging and self-esteem, or did
they lead you to question your place or value in the broader society? How did
these experiences shape the person that you know yourself to be today? Now
ask yourself to consider just how this particular experience might affect your
reactions to someone with a different personal history and different values. If
you are devoted to your extended family and your client shrugs off a family reunion as being “unimportant and too much trouble,” would you label that person as schizoid or interpersonally impaired? If you have a close involvement
62 Introduction
with a religious institution, do you tend to view others with casual religious
practices as having poorly formed character? How might your own experiences
affect the way that you filter or interpret someone else’s “story” that is either
similar or different from your own?
Our attunement to cultural diversity begins with the recognition that all
people are multicultural, all interactions are cross-cultural, and all experience is
perceived from a cultural perspective (APA, 2003). In the clinical setting, the
patient’s culture can influence the development and maintenance of the presenting problem, how the therapist perceives the problem, how the patient
copes, assets and barriers that will influence treatment, and the degree of collaboration and rapport. To further understand how culture affects our judgments
and interpersonal interactions, let’s take a closer look at the psychological and
social processes that are relevant to cultural dynamics.
Cognitive and Social Processes
A basic psychological process in how we organize information about our world
and experience is by reducing information into manageable chunks. The application of this cognitive process to social interactions was originally conceptualized by Allport (1954) in his social categorization theory. To make sense out of
a highly complex and dynamic social world, people use the normal process of
information chunking to create categories into which they can sort people.
Then they associate various characteristics, preferences, and tendencies with
particular categories and groups. Categorization appears to be an automatic,
largely nonvolitional process that serves several useful purposes, including fast
and efficient use of cognitive resources (Fiske, 1998), and a means by which we
locate and define ourselves within a complex social landscape (J. Turner,
1987). However, the advantages of speed and orientation are often offset by
significant issues of accuracy and notable resistance to change.
Easily noticeable characteristics, especially those that are visible or physical features of the person quickly create summary impressions. The summary
impression is then perceived as predominant or prototypic aspects of the category, forming a stereotype (Wade & Tavris, 2000; Worchel, 1999). This stereotype will persist, even when disconfirming information is available (Kunda &
Thagard, 1996). Behavior is then interpreted and judged through the filter of
the stereotype, further reinforcing the cognitive aspects of the existing category,
particularly when there is some motivation to confirm the stereotype (Kunda &
Sinclair, 1999). Arbitrary inferences may occur, especially concerning motivations of the categorized person, even if these inferences are inaccurate for one,
some, or most people or situations.
Stereotyping effects typically refer to judging an individual on the basis of
an expectation for the group or category, such that the person is assimilated
into category membership (Biernat, 2003). Exceptionally tall people are frequently assumed to have both skill and passion for playing the game of basketball. If you attend a national basketball tournament or a professional game,
where the players indeed do have skill and passion, you will also likely notice
the remarkable height among this group. A survey of tall high school seniors
would probably yield a wide range of interest, motivation, and skill concerning
Working with Cultural Diversity 63
basketball. Yet most of those tall seniors would probably be familiar with the
basketball stereotype, having been routinely asked about their interest or involvement in the sport.
Biernat (2003) further explores how stereotypes affect judgments in other
ways, including shifting subjective standards when behavior contrasts with
stereotyped expectations. Staying with our basketball example, this shift based
on category stereotypes would occur when a relatively small player receives
surprised congratulations for scoring a three-point shot, because he is “pretty
good for a short guy.” The subjective judgment of “good” is shaped by the contrast with the stereotyped expectation that skillful basketball players are exceptionally tall. According to Biernat, these stereotypic effects have a potentially
significant impact on the standards to which stereotyped groups are held, the
evaluations they receive, and the behaviors that others display toward them.
Consider further how different cultural dimensions may interact in applying
stereotypes. Persons of color, especially African Americans, may be stereotyped
as superior at basketball. Women, however, are stereotyped as less athletic than
men. Thus, if one imagines a superior basketball player, chances are—based on
stereotypes—that an image of a tall, African American male would come to
mind. When considering potential interests or talents of a petite Asian woman,
stereotypes could affect our judgments to the extent that we might put basketball at the end of a long list of options, if we even considered it at all.
An important social aspect of the categorization process is the separating
of categories into in-groups and out-groups (Fiske, 1998; Hornsey & Hogg,
2000; Tajfel & Turner, 1986; J. Turner, Brown, & Tajfel, 1979). In identifying
with different social groups to create an internal social identity and corresponding sense of place and position in the world, we automatically sort social
groups into categories of “us” and “them.” This identification can happen easily and quickly, often on the basis of visible group membership characteristics
(Atkinson & Hackett, 1995; D. W. Sue & Sue, 1999) and as soon as it does, predictable biases become operative (Wade & Tavris, 2000). First, there is a tendency to give favor to our in-group over the out-group. Second, we tend to
exaggerate differences between groups and similarities within our group and
to magnify the consistency of those relationships (e.g., “we” are better and very
different from “them,” and we are consistently better, while they are consistently inferior; Fiske, 1998; Hewstone, Rubin, & Willis, 2002). Reactions to our
in-group versus an out-group consistently show greater trust, more cooperation, greater generosity, and higher value (Brewer & Brown, 1998; Hewstone
et al., 2002). The differences may not be as significant or consistent as we think
they are, but our reactions tend to be highly consistent with our judgments.
Strong in-group affiliation has been associated with a greater degree of
prejudice toward outsiders (Swim & Mallett, 2002), a serious concern when the
distribution of power and resources is considered (APA Guidelines, 2003). Ingroup affiliation is strengthened in competitive situations, but with notable psychological risks. Competition can make people feel insecure and anxious, even if
they are winning, and angry and frustrated if they lose. It can decrease work motivation, and promote jealousy and hostility toward rivals (Wade & Tavris, 2000).
In-group members of a majority group may legitimize discrimination toward
out-group members of a minority group on the basis of perceived differences
64 Introduction
that are often simply a function of the categorical split between the groups. Prejudice, a negative stereotype with strong associated affect, will likely increase
when people worry about their incomes and stability of their communities and
perceive themselves to be in direct competition with another group for economic
resources.
Implications, Risks, and Risk Management
Social categorization has profound implications, particularly in competitive situations. We know that categorization is a normal cognitive process and an aspect
of the important executive function of constructed judgment. As clinicians and
researchers, we learn critical thinking skills that emphasize the importance of
both confirming and disconfirming information when forming judgments about
individuals or groups. However, the human interactions brought into therapy by
our clients are not typically characterized by careful, critical thought processes.
Even having a conscious endorsement of egalitarian beliefs does not necessarily
mean that one is free from unconscious stereotypes about groups (Greenwald
& Banaji, 1995). Our challenge is to bring a deliberate thought process into the
clinical interaction so that we can more fully recognize the influences of social
categorization within the client’s struggles and attempts at solution.
We all have multiple social identities, some visible and others more private.
We all make judgments and inferences on the basis of categories of social identity,
especially the most visible ones. And we are all influenced by the in-group/outgroup categorization process. As noted by APA (2003, p. 385) “membership in
one group helps to shape perceptions not only of one’s own group but also of
other groups. The links between those perceptions and attitudes are loyalty to
and valuing of one’s own group and devaluing the other group.” Further, persons
of racial or ethnic minority background comprise an out-group for most psychologists (APA Guidelines, 2003). Issues of competition, particularly for vital resources, can trigger a hazardous situation of polarization based on group
membership, increasing the possibility of prejudice and discrimination.
A starting point for mitigating the risks of social categorization in clinical
situations is the clinician’s own commitment to control automatic biases. This is
possible by following professional recommendations to establish motivation, information, and appropriate mood (APA Guidelines, 2003; Fiske, 1998). “Colorblind” approaches that minimize or ignore group differences have been found to
be ineffective and may increase stereotypes or perpetuate intergroup inequalities (Brewer & Brown, 1998; Macrae & Bodenhausen, 2000; Wolsko, Park,
Judd, & Wittenbrink, 2000). Instead, “ongoing development of one’s personal
and cross-cultural awareness, knowledge, and skills is recommended,” (APA
Guidelines, 2003, p. 384). Awareness of attitudes and values is the first step, especially awareness of attitudes of preference for within-group similarity, and
negative perceptions of out-group members. Exposure to other groups is important if it includes empathy and recognition of the different perspectives (Finlay
& Stephan, 2000; Galinsky & Moskowitz, 2000; Pettigrew, 1998) and actively
increases tolerance and trust of racial and ethnic groups (J. Greenberg et al.,
1992; R. M. Kramer, 1999) while directly recategorizing “us versus them” to a
concept of “we” (Gaertner & Dovidio, 2000).
Working with Cultural Diversity 65
Greater knowledge of and contact with different cultural groups in a context of empathy, understanding, and valuing should also include appreciating
what it is like to be a member of a culturally stigmatized group (Crocker, Major,
& Steele, 1998; Major, Quinton, & McCoy, in press). External events such as
acts of prejudice and discrimination trigger internal emotional and cognitive
processing of these experiences, activating schema for value and social status.
These events might occur episodically, randomly, or predictably, and without
regard to whether they are recognized as discrimination by the target, or by observers such as a therapist.
Discrimination is real, yet it is seldom “as real” to those for whom it is an
infrequent or distant event. Members of stigmatized groups live with the
specter of stereotype threat, or the constant possibility that their behavior will
be found consistent with negative stereotypes, regardless of the accuracy of this
judgment. Further, the broader cultural hierarchy is an inescapable stress, in
the sense that individual members cannot change the position of their own stigmatized group, and they cannot deny that a social hierarchy exists.
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 2)
Doris has some notable health risks and
problems. Is it possible that in-group and
out-group dynamics affected Doris’ response to the health care professionals?
As a member of a minority group and
a person with only a high school education, Doris may have been intimidated
by the all-Caucasian, highly educated
and powerful medical team. As an
African American, Doris is a member of
a group that, for a variety of reasons, is
apprehensive about placing trust in the
health care system. The brief and directive recommendations of the team, although well-intentioned, implied a lack
of understanding or concern for Doris
and her particular frame of reference.
She knows many people in her community who smoke and have hypertension,
diabetes, and obesity, and thus she does
not grasp the urgency of her health
risks. It is easier to dismiss the medical
recommendations that come from
sources she does not necessarily trust,
especially when she has much anecdotal
evidence that people live with these
problems all around her and nothing bad
seems to be happening to them. Doris
might be more attuned to the perspective of her collective self (what her family and community think of her) than to
her private self (what she thinks and
feels) or to her public self (what “they”
think she should do), but the team appealed mainly to her private self.
The medical team, on the other hand,
may have assumed that Doris did not
care about her size or health and was
unwilling to change. They may have exaggerated her acceptance of her obesity
and diabetes based on a stereotype,
since both conditions are so prevalent in
her African American cohort (www.cdc
.gov). Given limited resources (their
time), they may have automatically decided to discharge her with a few quick
recommendations to preserve the resources for other patients who might accept guidance more readily.
How could the team have been more
effective? We return to the discussion
of Doris in subsequent sections on effective strategies for practice.
66 Introduction
Individuals in a Cultural Context
Some theoretical models of identity development specific to racial and ethnic
minority groups have emphasized conceptualization of stages of cultural integration (see Atkinson, Morten, & Sue, 1998; Berry & Sam, 1997; Helms, 1990;
Parham, 2001; Ruiz, 1990). In contrast to members of a majority group whose
positive identification with their culture may develop automatically, members
of racial and ethnic minority groups have a more challenging psychological acculturation. They may initially value other groups (the dominant culture) and
devalue their own culture. In further development, they may move to valuing
their own group and separating from the dominant culture. Eventually there
may be some integration of value for both groups, with a sense of belonging to
the minority group. When resolution of these issues is insufficient, members
may become estranged or marginalized from one or both groups.
Although other perspectives present alternatives to a stage model of minority identity (e.g., Oetting & Beauvais, 1990–1991; Oyserman, Gant, & Ager,
1995; Thompson & Carter, 1997), it is essential to recognize that cultural forces
affect identity development, and in turn influence beliefs, emotions, behavior,
interaction styles, coping strategies, and further experiences within a person’s
social environment. Beginning with the genes and the socialization passed
along by parents, the initial bricks in the wall of identity are marked by cultural
features and references (Worchel, 1999). This cultural identity is an everchanging process.
Other situational social factors may influence the prominence of a cultural identity at any given point as well. The power, prestige, and success of
the group, the perception of costs and benefits associated with group membership, and the opportunity to connect with an orderly and well-defined set of
social practices may increase the salience or importance of a cultural identity,
particularly if a person is experiencing a crisis or some major life event
(Worchel, 1999). In negotiating the turbulent experience of marital dissolution, a common response is to increase affiliation with a religious organization
or church, often the church associated with one’s upbringing. When “Mrs.
Jones” is no longer Mrs. Jones, at least she knows she’s still a Christian, and
can count on the support of her “faith family.” An apt metaphor is offered by
Worchel (1999) to describe the stabilizing functions of cultural identity. “Our
ethnic identity, then, lies like a dog, sleeping by the hearth, waiting to spring
up when a personal or collective crisis confronts us” (p. 46). Further, turning
to the ethnic group during times of transition or personal crisis ensures that
there will always be someone to preserve the continuity of the group. Being a
member of a cultural group provides security and protection, particularly if it
is a dominant group.
Various personality theorists have described normal personal development as the striving to be individual, special, and independent along with striving to be included within a group and to have a secure social identity or sense
of belonging (see, e.g., Brewer, 1991). Integrating or balancing one’s sense of
being unique as well as being part of a social order is certainly influenced by
the larger culture or social environment and how personal identity is constructed within the culture. Both types of striving, to be an individual and to
Working with Cultural Diversity 67
belong to a social group can be expected but will likely vary in the framework
of relevant cultural influences.
Although the construct of culture is admittedly a fuzzy one, it can be related to the specific psychological functioning of the individual through specific
cultural themes or syndromes. In particular, the cultural theme of individualismcollectivism has been successful in describing systematic cultural variations that
affect individual behavior, attitudes, norms, values, goals, family structure, and
sense of self (Triandis, 1996; Vandello & Cohen, 1999).
Western culture, including the United States, is largely individualistic; it
values separate persons whose identity is based on their personal attributes or
accomplishments: what they do. People are motivated to develop attributes
that make them distinct and special, such as intelligence, beauty, talents, or
skills. Entry into social relationships or groups is often based on the person’s
unique or special contributions. Competition takes place between individuals,
and affiliation or acceptance into a group is based on individual merit.
In individualistic cultures, in-groups validate the self-worth of their members and to some extent meet social needs, but individuals try to minimize or
control their dependence on the in-group. The view of self emphasized is that
of private experiences and thoughts related to being a solo entity. Your happiness is not dependent on what “they” think of you, but rather on being true to
your own voice. Personal comfort, satisfaction, and achievement are important,
and a lack of inner harmony is viewed as problematic. Both inner disharmony
or confusion and a lack of distinction may be sources of anxiety or despair. Individualism may allow loose boundaries for social identity, with people moving
in and out of groups relatively easily, meeting new people, forming or disbanding relationships as needed, and making personal choices about which affiliations to select and which to discard. However, many options for group
involvement can lead to confusion and a sense of alienation. Individualistic
cultures exchange compliments frequently, and emphasize fairness and equity
in structuring interactions. Individualists also tend to see themselves as having
access or relative proximity to sources of power.
In contrast, more collectivist cultures of the East and traditional cultures
of Africa and Latin America emphasize external relationships such group
membership and socialization to the expectations of either a specific group or
the generalized other. The role that one has within a group, and how well one
serves the group in that role is key to personal identity, rather than unique personal achievements or interests.
The view of self is a collective one, characterized by perceived appraisals
from the perspective of significant others. The family is usually the most important in-group, but coworkers, religious affiliates, or scientific colleagues may
also form important in-groups. Although the definition of the in-group may
shift, collectivist cultures are organized to protect the integrity of the ingroups, and they may be unwilling to respect or cooperate with members of an
out-group. Boundaries between in-groups and out-groups may be clear and
unyielding. Social behavior is more affected by the in-group versus out-group
distinction within collectivist cultures, particularly in small, tight in-groups
such as the family, and when the in-group norms are highly associated with
important rewards and punishments (e.g., a paycheck).
68 Introduction
Anxiety is caused by in-group disharmony or public conduct that observers perceive as improper. Competition may be fierce, but it takes place between groups such as families. Avoidance of conflict helps to maintain
in-group harmony, and self-denial or suppression may be used to assist conformity. Those in collective cultures not only will do what is expected even if
it is noxious, but will adjust their perceptions to see burdens as enjoyable or
advantageous. Long hours may be spent cooking special foods for a family
gathering, even when the cook dislikes the food or has other pressing tasks;
yet this effort may be viewed as pleasant and worthwhile rather than tedious.
Teens or other family members may be expected to serve the needs of the
family, perhaps by providing child care or working in a family business, even
if it interferes with their personal plans or preferences. In-groups may also
perceive their own norms as universally valid, a form of ethnocentricism
(Triandis, 1995).
The individualism-collectivism theme is more than just tradition, as
these varying dimensions likely serve important social functions for stabilizing
and preserving a culture under certain conditions. Both individualist and collectivist elements are present in all cultures, but in different combinations
(Vandello & Cohen, 1999). Findings by Triandis (1996), indicate that when the
society is affluent, heterogeneous in its people, and complex in offering a
multiplicity of choices, then individualism will be higher. Loose boundaries
and rules are functional and serve to minimize friction between members,
where the context of persons and options is more elaborate or diverse. When
a society has fewer resources, is more homogeneous, has less social mobility
or choices available, or needs members to be interdependent to survive or live
in close proximity, then norms will be more tightly imposed. Secure boundaries and rules also serve to minimize friction between members when options are limited.
Thus, the overall context of the culture plays an important role in how
individual members design a balance between internal experience, personal
identity, and their external involvements and social identity. Without an understanding of this critical context, we run the risk of overemphasizing individualistic assumptions and failing to appreciate social perspective as an
operative and functional basis of personal identity. Our increasingly diverse
patient populations will include those whose personal identity is more allocentric than idiocentric, terms that refer to individuals who carry the values of a
culture of collectivism versus individualism (Triandis, 1995).
Persons who are allocentric may be high on conformity and emphasize interdependence, empathy, and respect among in-group members (Marin &
Marin, 1991). Behavioral intentions of persons who are allocentric are likely to
be most affected by cognitions that relate to the benefit of their culture. A
study of Hispanic (collectivist culture) versus non-Hispanic (individualistic culture) persons revealed notable between-group differences in attitudes that
could affect smoking cessation. Allocentric persons cared more about how
smoking would affect the health of others, set a bad example for children, or
bother others with bad smells. Individualistic persons, on the other hand, were
more concerned with the physiological effects of withdrawal from cigarettes
(Marin, Marin, Otero-Sabogal, Sabogal, & Perez-Stable, 1987).
Working with Cultural Diversity 69
Discussion Exercise
As an exercise in considering how cultural context informs our hypotheses
about patient beliefs, norms, expectations, sources of conflict and possible solutions, consider the following examples of two persons going through an experience of separation and divorce after 8 years of marriage, with no children
involved.
The first patient, Ms. A, has a master’s degree and a successful career as a
nurse administrator. She initiated separation and divorce proceedings due to
her spouse’s irresponsible financial behavior, including gambling debts, and a
lack of sexual intimacy. Ms. A attributes the low sexual intimacy to her own
long-harbored questions about her sexual orientation, but she mostly avoids
thinking about this because of the associated anxiety. She considers herself to
be a good friend and an excellent nursing supervisor, as well as a healthy, smart
person with sophisticated tastes and interests. She is loosely active in a faith
community, and currently attends a divorce support group at her church. She
experiences discomfort in her free time at home on nights and weekends when
she misses the physical presence of another person. She complains of loneliness
and pessimism about the possibility of future remarriage or any sort of relationship. The holidays are particularly difficult, so she assigns herself extra work
shifts to both cover the schedule and fill in her time.
The second patient, Mr. B, has a college degree and works in his familyowned business. He is living separately from his wife, which is a relief from the
strain of daily interactions with her, but he feels tortured by the possibility of
divorce. For at least 3 generations, he and his family have been prominent
members of a tightly organized faith community that regards divorce as unacceptable. The rules of this faith dictate adherence to specific behavioral norms,
and sanctions of eternal damnation in hell for violation of those rules. Mr. B’s
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 3)
As an African American and a highly
committed member of her church,
Doris is likely to be more allocentric,
evaluating herself and her experiences
from the perspective of others in her affiliated groups. She takes her role as a
teacher in the church very seriously
and wants to do whatever is needed to
serve this community. It may be culturally consistent for her to subordinate
her personal goals to the needs and directives of her community and the
community leaders.
These observations suggest that Doris
might be more responsive to considering
how her smoking negatively impacts
those in her environment, as opposed to
emphasizing only the effects on her personal health and comfort. She might be
concerned about the cost of smoking as
it affects her family budget or her contributions to the church, and she might
worry about offending her pastor with
smoke-breath at the Wednesday night
fellowship dinner. She might also be especially reluctant to give up the camaraderie of taking a smoke break with her
friends and colleagues. These hypotheses, though, need to be tested for relevance by discussion and exploration
with Doris.
70 Introduction
spouse was also sexually distant and financially irresponsible, spending and
causing debts that threatened the family business. When Mr. B’s father learned
of the financial threat to his business, he insisted, in a loving but firm way, that
Mr. B should do “whatever it takes” to remedy the problem and avoid bringing
the stigma of failure on the family name. Furthermore, it was considered Mr.
B’s responsibility to control his wife’s behavior. No matter how miserable he
might feel about the long hours of work, the financial strain, the lack of marital
intimacy or the degree of marital conflict, divorce was not an option in their
family or religious community. Meanwhile, Mrs. B initiated divorce proceedings. Mr. B complained of feeling hopeless and worthless as a person, and he
was preoccupied with fear of an afterlife in hell. Despite his inner turmoil, he
forced himself to go to work and attend church and family functions because it
was expected by others.
How does the cultural context of beliefs, rules, norms, group affiliation,
and perspective on self-image shape the particular experiences of Mrs. A and
Mr. B? Are they allocentric or idiocentric? What risks or advantages might be
associated with each cultural perspective? What do you think would bring
either of them into therapy? What sort of interventions might be helpful?
Would you have an easier time working with one or the other?
Culturally Sensitive Practice
Culturally sensitive practitioners are aware of the diverse aspects of their own
cultural identity, limits of experience, and stimulus value to others. They understand the cognitive and social processes that shape our judgments and behaviors, and recognize salient cultural differences. In this section, we outline
some basic strategies for building and maintaining cultural sensitivity in applied clinical practice.
You do not necessarily need an entirely new repertoire of clinical skills for
each and every culture, but rather the ability to see the patient’s cultural context, and to appropriately adjust, modify, or develop assessment and interventions practices to be both valid and useful (APA Guidelines, 2003; Bernal,
Bonilla, & Bellido, 1995; S. Sue, 1998). It is the therapist’s responsibility to
speak with the client in a way that accurately taps their worldview and reaches
into their cultural framework.
With assessment techniques, practitioners must keep in mind the fairness
and linguistic understandability for specific individuals, as well as the reference
group for valid test interpretation. Culture-specific therapy may include nontraditional interventions, including strategies or additional helpers in the process of healing. A therapist working with a Native American population might
participate in a “sweat lodge” experience with the tribal elders to gain their
trust and then enlist the elders as participants in certain therapeutic interventions with members of the community.
There is a large continuum of possible adjustments that you might make
to accomplish a culturally sensitive practice. It is easy to be overwhelmed at the
thought of understanding and appropriately responding to the vast array of po-
Working with Cultural Diversity 71
tential cultural variables. This sense of being overwhelmed can already be activated in the beginning practitioner who is just developing basic clinical skills.
And this sense can expand as you delve into the literature and find a burgeoning number of lists, requirements, and tasks to master as part of the notion of
cultural competence (Hansen et al., 2000; Hays, 2001; LaRoche & Maxie, 2003;
Matthews, 1997; Stuart, 2004; Tanaka-Matsumi, Seiden, & Lam, 1996). There
is no mistaking the reality that clinical practice is a complex endeavor, with potential for harm in mislabeling behavior, misdiagnosing problems, misdirecting
treatments, and disrespecting those seeking help. Further, traditional models
that form the basis of most clinical training are, in their Eurocentric, White,
middle-class male focus (see APA Guidelines, 2003; Strickland, 2000), at best
only partially adequate for serving the increasingly diverse population. To cope
with these notable demands, we turn first to a basic grounding in sound ethical
reasoning.
Ethically Based Interventions
Ethical grounding of culturally sensitive practice begins with the principles of
beneficence, nonmaleficence, justice, and respect for human rights and dignity.
These principles are a foundation for sound practice with all clients. We suggest
that practitioners use a series of questions to self-monitor their practice in appropriately conducting treatment amid the vast possible array of cultural issues
that may confront the provider at any given point in time.
• Beneficence: Is this patient (or couple or family) benefiting from treatment?
Are salient cultural expectations taken into consideration in measuring
possible benefits? Is the provider working toward goals that are both important to the patient and consistent with his or her cultural affiliations?
Is the provider using methods and strategies that are a good fit for the patient’s culture? Are there other treatment or community resources that
may better serve their interests?
• Nonmaleficence: Is this treatment plan free of potential harm to the patient? Are issues of cultural risks, including challenges to cultural norms,
given sufficient consideration as potential sources of stress and possible
harm? Is the provider alert to possible personal biases that could affect
the therapy relationship and cause some interpersonal harm to the patient?
• Justice: Is this patient receiving fair access to treatment resources and quality service? Has the tendency to categorize this patient as a member of an
“out-group” affected clinical judgment in any way?
• Respect for human rights and dignity: Is the provider alert to possible stereotypes in working with this patient? Has the provider appropriately discussed relevant issues with the patient so that he or she may have
adequate informed consent to treatment? Have alternative resources and
procedures been discussed? Has the provider taken the time to provide a
sufficient rationale for treatment that targets specific, culturally based
variables such as risk factors?
72 Introduction
In essence, culturally sensitive practice is an ethically based practice in
which care for the patient is the highest priority, and significant effort is made
to ensure benefit, respect, justice, and protection from harm.
Professional Boundary Issues
An area of clinical practice that challenges both novices and veteran practitioners is maintaining the boundaries of appropriate behavior in a professional
context. There is some difference of opinion among those in the profession
as to what constitutes a “boundary” and is appropriate or inappropriate practice (Helbok, Marinelli, & Walls, 2006; Pope, Tabachnick, & Keith-Spiegel,
1987). Questions of boundary violations inevitably come up when adapting
interventions to a patient’s culture, a course of action that might include using
nontraditional interventions, involving community leaders or helpers in the
intervention, or personally participating in culture-specific activities (APA,
2003, p. 392).
Is it a boundary violation to invite the head of the family to participate in
the treatment of a family member when the family is from a collectivist culture? Do you violate the patient’s boundaries by declining to involve pertinent
family members? Do you violate proper therapeutic boundaries by participating in a culturally important ritual with members of the patient’s community
to better understand their culture and to gain trust and rapport? What if the
patient wants to introduce the therapist to family at large, so that they will
know and trust him? Should the therapist accept an invitation to a family event
in the interest of culturally sensitive practice? Is the acceptance of a token gift a
boundary violation, or conversely, is it the refusal of the gift that is the boundary violation? Does age or disability status make a difference in determining
proper therapy boundaries?
These complex questions require a sensitive reasoning of each instance,
and judgment based on individual situations. A boundary violation might
occur if any or all of the following consequences result from the provider’s decisions or actions: (a) It causes the therapist to lose objectivity with regard to
the patient; (b) it exploits the patient in any way; and (c) it disrupts or derails
the ongoing treatment (Younggren, 2004).
It is incumbent on therapists to consider issues such as diagnosis, level of
functioning of the patient, and local standards and practices when considering
the impact of their actions. Consultation with other qualified professionals,
especially those who might be cognizant of the relevant cultural norms and
practices, is also an important step in supporting one’s reasoning as far as
adapting clinical methods (Younggren & Gottlieb, 2004). Under no condition
could an action that would violate basic standards of care be rationalized as a
cultural adaptation if it causes the therapist to lose objectivity, exploits the patient, or disrupts ongoing treatment. Engaging in sexual intimacy with the patient would always violate these standards, no matter what the cultural
standard. On the other hand, a therapist might participate in a cultural ritual
with the leaders of a community, such as the Native American sweat lodge
previously mentioned, and this would not necessarily violate any of the basic
standards of care.
Working with Cultural Diversity 73
Consultation with colleagues on cultural matters should be done tactfully
and in the context of a broader collegial or professional relationship. If possible,
consult with colleagues on the basis of their clinical or research experience in
working with the population of interest, or their expressed interest in the culture. In a survey of ethnic minority therapists, some reported the experience of
being viewed as an “expert” on their particular ethnic group as a positive one,
whereas others found it insulting that they would be perceived as helpful only
on matters of ethnicity (Iwamasa, 1996). Consultations with colleagues who
are just as unfamiliar with the culture of interest may result in further confusion, and perhaps misapplication of standards of care.
Therapists need to assess their own boundaries of competence when
working with a particular population and be alert to circumstances where an
understanding of cultural factors is essential for effective service, as noted in
Ethical Standard 2.01 (b) (APA, 2002). This standard also holds that therapists
must obtain relevant training, experience, consultation, or supervision as necessary, or make appropriate referral. Thus, in dealing with matters of age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, religion, sexual
orientation, disability, language, or socioeconomic status, we must seek enough
information and consultation or supervision to provide competent service that
is beneficial and not harmful to the patient, or help locate more appropriate, alternative resources.
Four Action Strategies
Good intentions are just that, unless there is a clear action plan for behavioral
implementation. Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter to thoroughly
delineate cultural competence in practice (see LaRoche & Maxie, 2003; Stuart,
2004; S. Sue, 1998), we offer the following four recommendations for building
and maintaining clinical skills in the cultural domain.
Action Strategy One: A Personal Cultural Inventory
First, take a personal cultural inventory, and periodically update it. Knowing
yourself and your primary identifications is the foundation for understanding
your assumptions, values, and possible biases, as well as comprehending your
potential impact on others. Cultivating awareness of your own cultural identity
is a vital step in countering ethnocentricism or the tendency to generalize your
own worldview as an assumed perspective. By acknowledging and accepting
yourself as a person with a particular point of view that is grounded in certain
cultural dimensions, you become more practiced in recognizing the importance
of cultural identity in yourself and others.
There are many different ways to explore your cultural identity. A thorough approach is detailed in Hays (2001) with multiple dimensions summarized in the acronym ADDRESSING. This stands for the cultural influences of
age and generational influences, developmental or acquired disabilities, religion
and spiritual orientation, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation,
indigenous heritage, national origin, and gender. This thorough approach offers
a broad overview of cultural identity and helps the therapist discern any specific dimensions that may be particularly salient.
74 Introduction
Other broad questions may be useful in exploring your personal cultural
inventory. How would you describe yourself in terms of cultural identity?
What comes to mind as important in describing you, at this point in time? Do
you think that your values and priorities are more allocentric or individualistic? What are the groups or communities that are or have been important to
you? Do you place high value on your group affiliations or are you loosely tied
to these commitments?
For a simple exercise to assess your perspective, complete 20 sentences
that begin with the stem “I am . . .” This is a method used by researchers to assess cultural perspectives of the self (e.g., Higgins & King, 1981). Once you
have completed the list, review each item to see if there is a reference to a social group (e.g., I am a mother; I am a native Floridian), a generalized public
perspective (e.g., I am viewed as responsible), or a private statement (I am
hard-working). Social references suggest an allocentric perspective, and private
self responses suggest individualistic perspective, with public perspective being
relatively infrequent (Triandis, 1995).
What elements of your cultural identity do you think have the most impact
on your professional role? When patients meet you for the first time, what will
strike them about you as a person? Remember, qualities are not static, but are perceived from the perspective of the other person. The therapist’s personal impact is
perceived by the client in terms of similarities and differences. What do your potential patients want to know about you to make an informed choice about working with you, and accepting your influence? Are you willing to answer inquiries
about personal matters, and if so, how will you address issues of differences?
Although answering patient inquiries is influenced by the theoretical approach taken and the case conceptualization, the principles of informed consent and respect for patient autonomy suggest that it is important to address
patient concerns directly and early in treatment, and support the patient’s right
to choose providers, even if this results in being rejected. Cultural sensitivity
also helps us to better understand why the patient asks these questions. An individualistic person might be more concerned with inquiring about your degrees and where you went to school. This feels culturally consistent to an
individualistic therapist, who easily answers such questions and views them as
appropriate. On the other hand, an allocentric person might not be highly concerned with your degree, but places trust in you on the basis of your affiliation
with an important group or the recommendation of a respected authority.
Common areas of cultural inquiry from patients include parental status (do
you have children of your own?), religious orientation (Are you a Christian? Are
you Jewish? What is your attitude toward Muslims?), sexual orientation or appreciation of different orientations (Are you heterosexual? How do you deal
with gay or lesbian people?), socioeconomic status (Do you understand what it is
like to have a low or high income?), or simply willingness to disclose basic personal information (e.g., where you grew up). By carefully and selectively sharing
some of this personal information (in the context of professional conduct), the
therapist might establish an “in-group” bond with the patient, a fundamental
step in developing trust and rapport. However, beginning therapists should be
aware that effective self-disclosure in a clinical setting requires considerable
judgment and skill. One must learn to strike a balance between the extremes of
Working with Cultural Diversity 75
sharing too much information and stonewalling the patient’s attempts to be informed about the clinician’s experience and possible sources of bias. As you are
learning the skills of therapy, caution and restraint in self-disclosure is the best
beginning posture. Gradually, you can learn how to provide limited information
for the sole purpose of serving the patient’s best interests.
These sorts of questions can be viewed as a welcome invitation by the patient to form a relationship, not as threats to your competence. No one can represent all cultural variations, or be fully conversant in aspects of different
cultures. If you are clear in knowing your own cultural identity, have an appreciation of its possible impact with patients, and understand how to maintain the
boundaries of your professional role, you will likely be more confident in discussing questions raised by the patient. An appreciation of important cultural
variations can also help you effectively understand the importance of the question from the patient’s point of view.
In instances where you may differ from the patient’s cultural preference,
but you believe that you have competent skills for helping him or her, you can
address the underlying issue of trust with a statement of reassurance. The following is a response to an inquiry about your family status:
I am married, but do not have children of my own. However, I do have experience in
helping families with troubled teens, and I am committed to offering my skills and
perspective to you in dealing with your current family issues. If you’re willing to give
it a try, we can see if you feel comfortable and can benefit from our work together.
However, if you would prefer to work with someone who is also experienced as a parent, I will be happy to provide you with the names of other qualified providers.
If there are cultural differences between yourself and your patient, it is
important to ask yourself whether you have the emotional or intellectual competence to accept the patient. If not, how will the patient’s best interests be
served? In some instances, you may decide that you can acquire enough intellectual competence through some additional continuing education. This may be
most adaptive when there are no significantly better alternative resources, and
cultural issues are not directly relevant to the presenting problem. This could
occur when a patient seeks treatment for panic attacks, and also happens to be
gay and Christian and is not struggling with either of these identities. However,
if you are not sure you have the emotional or intellectual competence for
working with someone of a particular group, even if that is not a presenting
issue, then responsible case management would indicate referring the patient
to alternative resources.
Determining the patient’s best interest in matters of cultural difference or
similarity with the therapist should also include a collaborative element. Even
though it may be uncomfortable to bring it up, this decision deserves the patient’s direct involvement. The important element is to convey openness to recognizing and discussing differences as they may matter to the patient, without
making assumptions about the patient’s perspective. This means not assuming
that the patient considers it difficult to work with you, because of a cultural
difference, or would be either comfortable or uncomfortable in discussing the
matter. The following is an example of how to open such a discussion:
76 Introduction
My goal is to be as helpful to you as I possibly can, and to address anything that
might affect our working productively together. As part of getting to know each
other, I would like us to be open about any questions or concerns that come up.
There are always differences between people in terms of cultural background, and
sometimes that matters, sometimes not. If there are differences between us that you
think might matter, or be worth discussing, would you be willing to talk about it?
Likewise, if we find common ground, let’s try to take note of that. How does that
sound to you?
The discussion of cultural differences does not always proceed gently.
There may be strong affect associated with both the cultural difference, and the
power difference between patient and therapist. These combined elements will
make some patients more submissive while others may become highly defensive and emotionally reactive to the therapist. They may present a barrage of
questions about your background or qualifications, or judgments of your competence. Although such reactions may feel like an attack, they can, if handled
empathically, lead into a productive discussion of cultural differences. An
African American patient in family therapy reacted to the Caucasian therapist’s
attempts to engage her in discussion of parenting issues by angrily exclaiming,
“I’m sick and tired of you White bitches trying to tell me how to raise my kids.”
This was a clear opportunity for the therapist to pursue discussion of the racial
difference issue, and to learn more about the patient’s perspective. To counter
with either anger or defensiveness would entirely lose this opportunity.
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 4)
Let’s return to our consideration of
Doris. If Doris’s medical team had taken
their own personal cultural inventory,
they might have been more alert to
some of the perceived differences between themselves and their patient. All
members of the team were fairly young
(under 45 years of age), and they represented a traditional power structure of
a Caucasian male (the physician) being
assisted by a group of Caucasian females. Further, they all had a slender
body size and tended to organize experience from an individualistic perspective.
A greater cognizance of these cultural
differences as having some potential impact on the interaction with Doris might
have helped the team realize the crucial
importance of taking time to develop
trust and rapport, helping Doris to see
herself as an actual participating member of the team and not just another case
on a long list. They might have been
more successful in gaining her involvement by getting to know her as a person
and allowing her to get to know them
before dispensing advice on how she
should change. Instead, they expected
her to have assumptions that matched
their own about valuing individual
health and taking personal responsibility for maintaining health, and they misjudged her readiness to change. No one
took the time to inquire about Doris’s
perceptions of the team and possible
barriers that might affect her ability to
trust and relate to them.
Working with Cultural Diversity 77
Action Strategy Two: Continuing Education
For the second action strategy, continue to seek new information and learn
about beliefs, values, and practices of various cultures and subcultures. There
are many experiential ways to come into contact with cultural diversity. Seek
opportunities to get to know people who are members of groups that are different from your own. Expose yourself to reading materials that represent a wide
range of audiences. Participate in an event or gathering that represents an opportunity to share in the practices of a certain culture or group, even if it is not
something you are particularly inclined toward.
This approach can take on a superficial cast if not done in a spirit of openness to seek new information. Eating dinner at the Chinese buffet is not a particularly strong exercise in cultural diversity. However, you can make an effort
to interact with individuals of Asian descent when the opportunity presents itself. By taking an interest in the people, you can find the opportunity to better
understand possible aspects of a culture. A snippet of exposure does not create
expertise, but it is a beginning.
For a simple exercise, again take an inventory, this time a quick one. During any given day, how many times do you have contact with someone of a
racial or ethnic background different from your own? Include incidental contacts such as people you might easily speak to in passing. How many of those
contacts do you see as an opportunity for learning something about cultural
experiences different from your own? Do you speak to the Egyptian cab
driver? Do you allow yourself to learn anything about his experience as someone of Arab descent? Perhaps challenge yourself to learn something new about
someone else’s cultural experience at least once a week or more. If you are
Christian, ask a Jewish friend if you can participate in her Seder supper. Go
ahead and talk about the differences in Jewish and Christian customs. Some information may seep in through sheer exposure, but it is much more likely to be
a culturally informative experience if you make it a point to learn something
related to the person’s cultural background.
Scholarly or academic forms of continuing education on cultural diversity
are key aspects of the second action strategy. Culture can be a continuing education theme or topic to which you return again and again throughout the
course of a career. Scholarly literature that informs our clinical work within
various cultural contexts is very useful and increasingly available (see Appendix 3.1). Where specific guidelines exist (APA, 2000a, 2002, 2004), it is important to become familiar with those guidelines and to keep a reference copy
handy for review and consultation as needed. Books on the topic of multicultural practice (e.g., Aponte & Wohl, 2000) as well as texts related to issues concerning particular populations or groups (e.g., Adams, 1995; Boyd-Franklin,
2003; Helms, 1990) can expand your cognitive or intellectual grasp of cultural
matters as they may affect patients.
There is a growing list of journals devoted to the study of diversity (see
Appendix 3.1). Empirical studies concerning certain cultural populations also
appear with some frequency in other topical journals (e.g., Bernal et al., 1995;
Nilsson & Anderson, 2004). In addition, selected web site resources may provide useful summary information about mental health issues and other matters related to specific cultural groups. The United States Department of Health
78 Introduction
and Human Services offers a detailed report from the office of the Surgeon
General concerning culture, race, ethnicity, and mental health. In addition to
independent reading, many excellent workshops or continuing education seminars offered by professional organizations provide opportunities to keep expanding your externally developed knowledge base (see Appendix 3.1 for more
resources).
This recommendation for ongoing learning also merits a caveat of recognizing the impossibility of ever completing the task (LaRoche & Maxie, 2003).
Students delving into material concerning different broad cultural groups often
have a similar initial reaction of realizing the group actually comprises many
subgroups. Arab Americans might have family originating from any of 20 or
more countries with significant Arab populations (Erickson & Al-Timimi,
2001). Further, approximately two-thirds of Arab Americans were born in the
United States, as there have been at least three waves of Arab immigration, beginning in the 1880s. With this scratch to the surface of the Arab culture, we
begin to see the possible complexity, even before considering religion, acculturation stresses, or educational standing.
We must seek information so that we are not completely culture ignorant,
yet recognize that superficial knowledge will not result in an overall competence. The risk of a little superficial knowledge, without recognizing its limits,
could be overgeneralization and treating a patient as a member of a class or category. Instead, we hope that knowledge gained from studying about a group
can be used to inform hypotheses about specific people. Given the vast array of
cultures and cultural combinations and permutations, we recognize the need to
have a strategy of openness and caring about each unique client, combined
with curiosity about cultural influences. To attempt to present ourselves as
knowledgeable about all cultures can only be a pretense, and one that violates
the values of honesty and genuineness that are expected in psychotherapy
(Wohl, 2000).
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 5)
The diabetes team that worked with
Doris was a top-notch group of health
professionals who were diligent in their
ongoing continuing education. After
their consultation with Doris, several
members of the team attended the annual conference of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. While there, they heard a
presentation on the concept of religious
health fatalism as it affects members
of the African American faith community (Franklin, Schlundt, & Wallston, in
press). They learned about the importance of religious affiliation in the
African American community and how
certain beliefs about faith and health
may substantially affect subsequent
health-related behavior. This provided
the team with some ideas to explore with
Doris concerning culturally based beliefs
and attitudes affecting her response to
their interventions. Doris might hold the
belief, “I don’t need to try to improve my
health because I know it is up to God.”
Or, “If God wants me to have better
health, He will provide.”
Working with Cultural Diversity 79
Action Strategy Three: Beware of Cultural Cookbooks
Continuously seeking new information leads us directly to the third action
strategy, which is to beware of the simplicity of cultural cookbooks. A person is
not simply a product of a singular cultural group. Social categorization is an
automatic process that aims to simplify the world, but with significant risk of
overgeneralization. As you go about gathering more information about cultures, be sure to look for information that is consistent and inconsistent with
group practices or norms.
In clinical work, it is especially important to suspend preconceptions about
patients based on cultural background, and to recognize that patients may indeed be quite different from others in the group in which they appear to belong
(Cardemil & Battle, 2003). No individual person is a living representation of all
aspects of a culture, and no culture is so homogeneous that all generalizations
apply to all members (Wohl, 2000). Sometimes the recognition of possible divergence from expected cultural patterns is a significant clinical issue, and can give
rise to important personal exploration. If patients are Hispanic, that does not automatically mean they will be Catholic. If they are Hispanic and Catholic, that
also does not mean that their distress is necessarily related to difficulties in
family relations. Hispanic and Catholic cultures are traditionally collectivistoriented, yet it may be that the educational and economic aspects of the patient’s
culture are the salient issues and the clinically significant concern revolves
around trying to succeed in a highly competitive environment.
For each patient, find out how demonstrated distress may or may not be
related to ethnic or cultural issues. We might expect that in times of relative
stress, crisis, or transition, the patient’s sense of belonging to some identified
cultural group will be salient. The person who does not have a sense of belonging, or who seems to have lost the belief in belonging is likely to be in the greatest degree of distress. It may be that changes in the patient’s life have caused
corresponding changes in cultural associations, or rendered a previous association more tenuous or even nonexistent.
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 6)
Doris eventually made her way back to
the diabetes clinic after being urged to
do so by her primary care physician.
She returned to the PCP because of vision changes and tingling in her hands
and feet, symptoms that scared her. The
doctor said this was peripheral neuropathy caused by her diabetes. After
Doris met with the team, the psychologist scheduled an extended visit so they
could take an in-depth psychosocial
health history. This step allowed the
team to better understand Doris and
her health needs, to explore the ambivalence Doris seemed to have about
making changes, and to discuss specific
ways that culture affected her health
problems.
During this history taking, it became
clear that Doris was concerned that her
body size detracted from her appearance, even though she did not view extreme thinness as the only attractive
form. She was indeed concerned with
the health risks related to obesity. However, she also endorsed many beliefs
(continued)
Action Strategy Four: Keep a Multidimensional Focus
Finally, keep the multi in multicultural, remembering that all persons are multidimensional. There are many aspects of a cultural identity, and full understanding of a client cannot happen if we assign too much weight to one or two
cultural variables. For example, one of the most common cultural misconceptions encountered among young clinicians in training is the belief that all older
persons are more alike than they are different. This automatic reaction is
based on assigning too much weight to a single cultural variable (age) and assuming that the out-group is highly similar in composition, and less desirable
as a group.
In fact, there are more differences between age groups than not. Older
adults as a group are more heterogeneous than other age groups (APA, 2004;
Crowther & Zeiss, 2003; Nelson & Dannefer, 1992). Brief reflection usually
makes clear how this stereotype of similarity of all older people is just that, a
stereotype. In a group of persons at age 75, you are likely to find a notable
range of cognitive functioning and possible clinical symptoms, physical health
and mobility, emotional well-being, social engagement and access to friends,
economic status, daily living circumstances, and responsibilities including employment and the care of grandchildren or other dependents. Compared with
clinical trainees at age 25, there are far more differences within the elder
group. And these differences can reflect degrees of greater rather than lesser
desirability compared with those of the younger group. Many elders have plentiful free time, high economic status, comfortable living arrangements and
freedom from responsibility, close connections with loved ones, good physical
health, stable emotional well-being and a strong sense of life satisfaction. A
multidimensional perspective is required for understanding someone in either
80 Introduction
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 6) (Continued)
characteristic of religiously based health
fatalism. Her ambivalence about taking
action was affected by these fatalistic
beliefs, as well as the tension between
the perspective of her in-group and priorities of her community, and the
team’s expectation of a substantially individualist focus on her health needs.
Thus, the psychologist advised the
team to encourage Doris to view her
weight management as an important
contribution to her family. They provided specific information to her on the
mechanisms of health impairment in
obesity and diabetes. This helped Doris
see the connection between these two
conditions and others in her family who
eventually died from the medical consequences. By helping her to understand
how diabetes could cause breakdown of
the vascular system that would harm
her heart, kidneys, and nervous system,
the team helped Doris realize that the
disease progression was not inevitable.
To specifically address her religiously
based fatalistic beliefs, the team might
also suggest that perhaps God was providing this information to help her improve her health. They could gently
guide her toward resolving the tension
between her commitment to her social
affiliations, and her need to attend to
her personal health.
group, with an appreciation of how the magnitude of differences may vary
within groups.
Cultural affiliations may shift or change across a life span. Our culture is
heterogeneous, with boundaries that are to some degree loose or fluid. Given
the complexity of our society, there is also a general expectation of cultural
adaptability or change to meet the demands of varying circumstances. However, both internal and external barriers affect psychological and social shifts in
cultural participation. Boundaries that should be open, or appear to be open
may in fact be only semipermeable. Emotional and behavioral stress associated
with encountering and crossing cultural boundaries is an important clinical
consideration.
A minority student from a low-income, single-parent family attends a
competitive college preparatory academy. His mother feels strongly that this
opportunity will provide many advantages for her son’s future, yet she endures
constant ridicule from her coworkers for all the time, effort, and expense required to support his full participation in school activities. The support offered
by the in-group of other parents at the academy may be good, it may be marginal, or the atmosphere may be downright hostile to this scholarship student.
Internally, the student may wish to both please his mother, and gain access to
the world of privilege in the academy, yet feel guilt over the growing distance
from old friends, his neighborhood culture, and the emotional and financial
strain on his mother.
Working with Cultural Diversity 81
Clinical Example: Doris (Vignette 7)
Let’s revisit why Doris did not respond
immediately to the recommendations
of the diabetes team. Her actions were
both similar and dissimilar to what
might be expected just on the basis of
her age, race, and gender. First, she had
the sense of mistrust in the health care
system that may be common among
African Americans. However, she did
not hold the attitudes of large body size
acceptance that others expected based
on her age and race. She had a strong
religious affiliation that might have
been predicted by her race, but religious affiliation alone does not explain
her response to the first diabetes consult. Rather, her religious fatalism is the
psychological component that most affected her health-related behavior.
The prevalence of certain health conditions and behaviors within her culture may have had notable impact on
her thinking. The salience of seeing diabetes, hypertension, and obesity as
common among her friends and family
needed to be acknowledged by the team
as a perspective different from their
own. For the team, these were serious
conditions that merited significant time
and attention. For Doris, these conditions were just part of everyday living,
and health deterioration was a matter
of God’s plan. Finally, as an allocentric
person, Doris was particularly conflicted by the expectation that she invest
more time and energy attending to a
personal choice when she believed that
her community did not think this was a
necessary or important use of her time
or resources.
Summary
In a complex society with many options as ours, openness, understanding, flexibility, and self-awareness are key elements of working with cultural similarities and differences. In conducting psychotherapy, it is likely that we encounter
people who are adjusting or revising their cultural identity as they progress
through their lives, encountering inevitable changes in opportunities and circumstances. Facilitating this process can be a fulfilling challenge.
Instead of trying to ascertain fixed aspects of the patient’s cultural identity
based on group stereotypes, and trying to alleviate distress by creating a better
fit with this given identity, we can embrace the notion of cultural identity as an
ongoing process. Psychotherapy offers a protected relationship where cultural
limits and opportunities are acknowledged and explored. The role of the therapist can be likened to that of a guide who helps the patient sort out the cultural
pressures and options impinging on psychosocial adaptation. In an ethically
grounded practice, understanding the multiple dimensions of culture is vital to
understanding and effectively helping our diverse clientele. Culturally attuned
practitioners take a personal cultural inventory and periodically update it. They
are careful about self-disclosure, but respect the client’s right to be informed
about the therapist’s cultural influences. Culturally attuned practitioners continually seek new information about various cultures and subcultures, but
avoid the oversimplicity of cultural cookbooks. Instead, they maintain a multidimensional perspective on culture and its many implications.



Because science and practice are two cornerstones of clinical psychology,
clinical research and outcome assessment can be considered as the building blocks of clinical practice. Various research methods are used in clinical
psychology, including case studies and qualitative research designs. The objectives of clinical research are twofold. The first objective is to build a scientific
foundation for understanding normal and abnormal human behavior or
psychopathology. The second objective is to determine which interventions are
effective in changing or adjusting problematic behavior and emotional disorders, and under what conditions these interventions are known to be effective.
The quality and usefulness of any clinical intervention is directly tied to the
quality of its empirical support.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Describe the importance of empirical validation or support for clinical
interventions.
• Explain the differences between experimental, quasi-experimental, and
observational designs.
• Describe the pros and cons of single-subject designs and case study research.
• Differentiate between empirically validated, empirically supported, wellestablished and probably efficacious therapies, and evidence-based therapy.
• List the pros and cons of manualized practice protocols.
84 Introduction
Having gained an appreciation for the many specialties in the field of clinical psychology, the variations in degrees and requirements for practitioners in
this field, and individual and cultural diversity in the practitioners and consumers of clinical psychology, you should begin to wonder what techniques,
treatments, and protocols are available to clinicians for helping people with
clinical needs. How do consumers, clients, or patients, know what type of therapy to seek? How can insurance companies justify paying for mental health services or verify that therapy is effective? How does the field substantiate itself
compared with other alternative therapies for alleviating suffering and improving psychological well-being?
This chapter reviews a sample of empirical research strategies used to test
clinical therapies and techniques for a broad range of populations and disorders. The generalization of clinical research to clinical practice is explored, with
descriptions of empirically supported treatments, evidence-based practice, and
manually driven therapies. Pros and cons of these developments are addressed,
and the field’s means of dissemination is reviewed. Future chapters explore
how clinicians develop a treatment plan and select certain techniques from
among the standardized treatments and protocols.
Clinical Research and Research Methods
Research in clinical psychology spans the gamut of research methods, designs,
and adherence to general principles of science. Investigations vary from use of
highest-constraint to lowest-constraint methods, with a wide range of strategies
and techniques between these two artificial anchors. Numerous research
methods are covered in research courses you will take, so only those relevant
to outcomes research are described here. High-constraint research refers to
methods and designs in which the conditions, variables, and participants are
scrupulously screened and selected for specific traits or characteristics desired
by the researcher to isolate what is being studied from any possible confounds, or undesired interference in the study. Quantitative experimental and
quasi-experimental designs are categorized as varying degrees of highest constraint research. These are the research designs you probably most often think
of because pharmaceutical companies and other funding agencies provide financial support for treatment outcome studies using these designs, and therefore, radio and newspaper advertisements seeking participants are plentiful
(e.g., “Are you feeling sad, blue, hopeless, depressed . . . the University of
Somewhere is conducting a study to test a new medication to help you. Please
call to see if you qualify.”).
Lowest constraint research describes studies that use methods and designs where the investigator—while creating little if any interference—
observes conditions, variables, and participants in natural surroundings or
circumstances. Examples of lower constraint research include observational,
correlational, and archival studies. When participants complete a packet of
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 85
questionnaires based on personal characteristics or experiences, but do
not enroll in any interventional program, such studies exemplify this type
of research. Similarly, reviews of insurance company information that
compile statistics of the types of patients who have positive outcomes in psychotherapy is archival (lower constraint) research. The case study, which
is classified as lower constraint research, has recently gained more attention
in the research and practice of clinical psychology because of its potential for
significantly affecting systematic treatment selection. In line with this research, practitioner-scholars advocate for the development of local clinical
science. In this approach, clinicians adopt an outcomes-focused treatment
and apply research methodology to their evaluation of practice on a case-bycase basis. The aggregate of case-based data acquired through practice would
then inform other clinicians and researchers about the effectiveness of
treatment interventions with clients who are not screened for uniformity in
their presentations or for control of confounding variables in settings or
treatment.
Some biases exist about which types of research are more scholarly
or meritorious, but the knowledgeable psychologist recognizes that the goal of
the research dictates the design and methodology chosen, and that almost
all methodologies have their limits and flaws. The choice of research design
and methodology should be made by using honed critical thinking and rational decision-making skills toward achieving the goal of answering research
questions.
Clinical psychologists whose work crosses the research-practice spectrum
can appreciate the need for bridging the gaps between the two subspecialties of
the field. True scientist-practitioners recognize the important contributions
made by clinicians and researchers, and the current limitations of both areas of
practice. The following basic explanations of several research designs are helpful in understanding the subsequent review of where the field stands in applying research to practice, and having practice inform research in the service of
human psychological welfare. While the decision-making skills to be employed
are beyond the scope of this chapter, the problem-solving model of clinical
decision making (A. M. Nezu, Nezu, & Lombardo, 1999) can be useful for considering clinical problems and choosing relevant research applications to evaluate them, or for selecting empirically validated or evidenced-based methods for
use in practice.
Research Designs
Experimental research (“true research”) and quasi-experimental research are families of designs that are typically used in research laboratories or research clinics
with large numbers of participants, comparison groups, and multiple data collection points (pretreatment, posttreatment, follow-up time frames). They involve a high degree of input, manipulation, and selection of participants, or
control of environmental, treatment, therapist, and participant characteristics.
These designs are often used to determine cause and effect in examination of
86 Introduction
two or more independent and dependent variables.* Random selection, random assignment, and control groups define the differences between experimental and
quasi-experimental research and other research designs. Randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) are often the basis for discovering empirically supported treatments, as defined later on. Researchers randomly select and assign participants
to experimental conditions (e.g., treatment groups, exposure to different environmental stimuli) and compare those who get a dose of the experimental variable with those who do not. In this way, researchers can draw conclusions
about the relationships between variables that investigators observing individuals independent of each other cannot. The influence these parameters have on
controlling the threats or confounds to the interpretation of the results is significant, but not without criticism.
Experimental designs employ random selection when feasible, and random assignment as a defining feature. Quasi-experimental designs use random
selection often to the extent that experimental designs do, but the population,
setting, or other features of the independent variable prohibit random assignment. Random selection and random assignment represent different aspects of
research methods and procedure, and have different implications for interpreting the outcomes. Students and those new to research often confuse these
terms, and therefore, a careful explanation follows.
Random Selection
Random selection requires that each participant in an overall population has
an equal chance of being selected. How the population is defined is the key to
determining the likelihood of employing random selection. Selecting a random
sample from the population of clinical child psychologists would require identifying and potentially recruiting all clinical child psychologists for a given
study. This would mean that psychologists from all over the world would need
to be identified (with credentials and training being equivalent), and then a
random sample of this population would be selected. For most studies, based
on feasibility due to budget and logistics among other reasons, the likelihood of
a true random selection of this population would be unrealistic. Simply determining the equality of degrees and training across cultures would be a tremendous task. As such, psychology studies typically use a convenience sample
restricted by such things as geographic location, accessibility, or volunteer sta-
* Independent variables are the input variables, or the variables that the investigator chooses to
exist in an expected and determined way. Examples of independent variables include race, gender, therapy type (e.g., psychopharmacology, cognitive-behavioral therapy, family therapy),
years of training, or degree of depression (mild, moderate, severe). Dependent variables are the
output variables, or the variables that are expected to be affected by the input variables. These
are the variables the researchers are watching to see if and how they change as a result of the independent variable. Independent and dependent variables are often thought of as part of an
“if/then” statement. For example, “If severely depressed persons engage in cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT), then they will experience a decrease in depression and increase in quality of life
following therapy, compared with (if) severely depressed persons who do not engage in CBT.
Therapy is the independent variable that is selected by the researcher; quality of life and posttreatment depression (or changes in depression scores) are the dependent variables.
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 87
tus. If, however, the population of “clinical child psychologists” was further defined as “Pennsylvania licensed clinical child psychologists in Philadelphia,”
and you were a researcher living in that area, random selection might be more
feasible. You could verify a list of qualified psychologists from the state regulatory board licensure rosters and would need to establish some inclusion and exclusion criteria to determine who is a child psychologist, and what constitutes
practice in Philadelphia. The selection method would then require giving each
psychologist an equal chance of being chosen for the study. This latter scenario
is potentially feasible on a limited budget and time schedule.
Random Assignment
Supposing that you now have selected people to participate in your research
study, how will you decide who gets what treatment, by whom, or when? Or,
how will you decide which therapist will conduct therapy for which individuals
or groups? In true experiments (experimental design), participants would be
randomly assigned to each of the experimental conditions. This means that
each participant (already selected to participate in the study-at-large) has an
equal chance of being placed in any of the experimental conditions. So, if you
were testing the differences between cognitive-behavioral therapy and nondirective supportive psychotherapy, ideally each participant would have a 50/50
chance of being assigned to one of these conditions, and this assignment would
occur essentially by a method similar to flipping a coin. Thus, the independent
variable lends itself to a true experimental design.
If you are comparing the impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy on treating
generalized anxiety disorder in persons who have a significant other (spouse or
partner) with those who do not, you cannot randomly assign your participants
to groups. The characteristics of your sample will dictate which group they are
in—they either come to therapy having a significant other, or they do not have a
significant other. Thus, the independent variable is not randomly assigned. There
is no variation in each participant’s likelihood of being in a particular group—
they are either in it, or they are not. In quasi-experimental research, therefore,
investigators are studying the cause and effect of independent and dependent
variables, but the study is created, in part, around existing conditions or characteristics of the participants, the setting, therapy conditions (e.g., therapist characteristics), or other features of the independent variable already in place. The
design is still experimental because cause and effect is being studied, and there is
manipulation of some aspect or at least one independent variable; in the preceding case, the investigator is manipulating therapy condition.
There are many variations to experimental and quasi-experimental designs with regard to sampling techniques (e.g., how participants are selected),
type of comparison groups to be used against what is being studied (e.g., comparing your treatment to no treatment, or to a different kind of treatment),
methods to minimize sources of artifacts and bias, types of variables being investigated, and even the components of the study that identify the potent factors of an intervention. The interested reader is referred to research methods
textbooks (e.g., Kazdin, 2003) for more detail.
Observational study designs are a lower-constraint type of research than
experimental designs, but also with high yield of information. As with the
88 Introduction
experimental and quasi-experimental designs, researchers can often identify
cause and effect from variables studied with this methodology, but the researchers’ role is to observe rather than to affect or intervene with the variables. Observational designs examine naturally existing variables (e.g.,
height, personality disorder), or variables that result from naturally occurring
circumstances (meaning the investigator does not create them, e.g., pregnancy, trauma experience, medical disorder).
Observational designs can answer numerous research questions. These
designs may be used as precursors to treatment outcome studies to support the
need for intervention development, or for posttreatment studies to observe
populations’ functioning or well-being over time. Likewise, treatment efficacy
(whether the treatment works in regular settings or circumstances) studies
might utilize observational studies because interventions may be evaluated in
their natural settings, without manipulation of treatment variables, therapist
variables, or patient variables. For this type of study, it would be important to
follow up on an empirical finding that a particular intervention works under
ideal laboratory settings. Benefits of observational designs are that multiple
variables can be considered simultaneously because there is less of an attempt
to control for all confounding variables (e.g., noise or distracting factors) in a
study. Observational designs might be less expensive than employing experimental designs, and more information may be obtained as to how well the
treatment will generalize to applications in real world settings.
Qualitative research studies are another form of lowest-constraint research
designs. Qualitative studies have a different purpose and result than quantitative research, yet they are both empirical approaches to obtaining new knowledge. Instead of summarizing findings about relationships between variables
based on large groups of participants, qualitative research aims to expand and
broaden the understanding of a particular topic or phenomenon. Such studies usually
depend on a small number of participants or groups of participants (interviewing each group as one participant) and are not typically hypothesis driven.
Qualitative research often takes the form of semi- or unstructured interviews
to investigate a rare or poorly understood condition, experience, or circumstance, individualized responses to given circumstances, or something typically
deemed personal or private (e.g., use of spiritual guidance). Perhaps, the focus
is on aspects of a person’s thoughts, feelings, or behaviors that require elaboration rather than on concise responses to pencil-and-paper tests. Interviews
allow for in-depth responses by participants that might not otherwise be acquired. Data takes the form of narratives, stories, or even words used. Data is
typically analyzed by a collaboration of interpreters or by software used to analyze words or phrases that summarize the gist of materials.
Although different from quantitative methodology, qualitative research
uses legitimate methodology and is a “systematic, replicable, and cumulative”
approach to research (Kazdin, 2003, p. 329). Qualitative research can help develop a particular theory, or to identify variables important to study using
quantitative methods. Interviews with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) persons and their caregivers helped determine relevant aspects of quality of life
(QOL) for this population to be included in a later-developed QOL instrument
(Simmons et al., 2006).
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 89
The possible roles for qualitative research in treatment-outcome studies
and empirically validated treatment are several. Qualitative research may be
used to understand patient-client relationships and their impact on treatment,
patients’ experience of therapy, and how therapeutic lessons are or are not integrated into daily functioning. Perhaps interviews with patients might reveal
what they deemed important in treatment. Likewise, qualitative study of therapists’ experience delivering empirically supported treatments or their decision
making during this process would likely enhance our understanding of treatment implementation. There are many other places for qualitative research in
the examination and development of empirically supported treatment, some of
which can be found in the literature and journals exclusively publishing qualitative studies, such as in Qualitative Health Research, Qualitative Research, and
Qualitative Research in Psychology.
Compared with large-sample experimental group designs and small-scale
qualitative research studies, single-subject designs describe another important research methodology. Single-subject designs and case studies are useful venues
for studying the responses of individuals (or single collective groups of individuals) to assessment or treatment, and can provide valuable information toward
development or evaluation of treatment-outcome research. Case-based research is discussed later in this chapter. Although single-subject designs are
sometimes criticized for lack of generalization, there are benefits and reasons
for studying people individually.
Single-subject experimental designs, such as ABAB designs, multiplebaseline designs and changing criterion designs, maintain the same methodological rigor of experimental group designs. Research employing single-subject
methodology examines the causal effects of independent variables on dependent
variables, but looks at these relationships within one individual (or single group
or single society, referred to as a “single case” from this point forward) rather
than between groups of individuals exposed to different conditions. Instead, the
single case may be exposed to various conditions at different times (e.g., first, a
nutritional counseling program; second, an exercise regimen; third, a weight
management support group), or to the same conditions at various time points
(e.g., alternating 6 weeks of group weight management participation with 6
weeks of self-monitoring). The distinguishing characteristics of single-subject designs include continuous assessment and use of different phases.
Continuous assessment is defined as “observations on multiple occasions
over time prior to and during the period in which the intervention is administered” (Kazdin, 2003, p. 274). Continuous assessment usually includes a baseline assessment that describes the observations made about the independent and
dependent variables prior to any intervention or purposeful influence by the
researcher. Baseline assessment is critical to making predictions about what
might or might not occur as a result of introducing the independent variable(s).
Different phases refers to the “different periods of time (several days, weeks) in
which a particular condition (baseline or intervention) is implemented and
data are collected” (Kazdin, 2003, p. 274). Thus, the continuous monitoring
and evaluation of the independent and dependent variables allow critical
changes to be detected, and permit the researcher to distinguish whether the
changes in the dependent variables occurred subsequent to the introduction of
90 Introduction
the independent variables. The different phases allow for different interventions or independent variables to be introduced while being monitored, and
therefore, for cause and effect to be determined. In fact, if you are an empiricist
at heart, or have knowledge of cognitive-behavioral psychology, you might
begin to wonder how this methodology differs from best practice in applied
clinical psychology. Stay tuned for the answer to this question.
In ABAB designs, treatment and assessment are alternated to monitor
changes that occur in the dependent variable as a result of introducing or discontinuing an intervention. In multiple-baseline designs, several dependent
variables are monitored for an extended period before introducing treatments
or interventions and monitoring their impact. If a behavioral modification plan
is designed to stop child tantrums, the child’s behaviors in school, home, and
perhaps in the company of babysitters are monitored. The intervention might
first be introduced in one setting, while all three circumstances continue to be
monitored. The clinician or researcher continues to look for changes in the behaviors to see if the modification plan is directly impacting the behaviors. The
child may discontinue tantrums only in the environment where the plan is
in place, or perhaps the impact generalizes to other settings as well. In such
multiple-baseline designs, the intervention may be tested across settings, across
behaviors (so first tantrums are targeted, then aversive eating behavior, and finally perhaps an increase in prosocial behavior is monitored). In more complicated designs, multiple baseline designs can be tested across participants (see
Kazdin, 2003, pp. 283–285 for more details).
Changing criterion designs monitor exactly what is inferred. Relationships
between independent and dependent variables are studied, and the goal is to
show that “behavior changes in increments to match a performance criterion”
(Kazdin, 2003, p. 286). The independent variable, or treatment/intervention/consequence, continues to change (i.e., more/less reinforcement/punishment/consequence) after each goal is met (desired increase or decrease
in behavior is exhibited). While quantitative data is likely collected during
single-subject research, it is analyzed by visual inspection methods rather
than by statistical analyses.
The previous descriptions are oversimplified, and there are many other
single-subject designs. The goal here is to give you at least some sense of what
is described in research articles reviewing treatment efficacy or effectiveness
based on the single-subject designs. But, why use single-subject designs if interpretation is subject to visual inspection, and therefore to researcher bias?
Why use this methodology if the ability to generalize the findings to others is
possibly limited?
The benefits of single-subject designs are several. First, unique treatments,
characteristics, or conditions can be studied in single-subject designs, whereas
large N studies may not be feasible due to limited access to participants (by virtue
of incidence) or the cost of such implementation. An example might be a singlesubject design to study the impact of a new anger management therapy with hypertensive patients (Wilner, 2004). In this situation, known elements of different
cognitive-behavioral therapies were combined with close medical monitoring of
the patients’ blood pressure to evaluate if this type of therapy would be effective
in reducing anger, lowering blood pressure, increasing problem-solving skills,
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 91
and improving overall quality of life. Because aspects of this treatment were
tested empirically with other populations, modifications based on this sample’s
needs could be considered and close evaluation by the clinician and patients’
physicians allowed for fine-tuning the intervention based on individual needs.
The important concept here is that all other explanations for change in anger and
blood pressure could be ruled out and any changes could be attributed to the intervention. This is the essence of internal validity, and one of the key elements to
experimental designs. Once success is met on a small-scale study, and researchers can determine what elements of a treatment should be included,
added, or taken away, larger studies can be conducted more cost-effectively.
Thus, single-subject designs share some of the credibility of larger experimental
studies while allowing more specificity in addressing the issues at hand and can
serve as a precursor to larger studies.
Single-case studies are also important to study the implications of having
or treating rare conditions. It is likely less common to attract a large sample of
schizoaffective patients with panic disorder, diabetes with resulting nerve damage, and asthma to study the modification of an empirically validated treatment for panic disorder without comorbid difficulties. With both medical
conditions compromising relaxation treatment, and the psychological disorder
needing to be accounted for, empirically testing the results of thoughtful clinical decision making could be important to inform other clinicians of what
worked and did not work in such a situation. If such research is not conducted,
independent clinicians must continue to rely on trial and error, without systematically knowing what about the therapeutic interventions is helpful or not.
Further discussion of case-based research is provided later in this chapter.
The limitations of single-subject designs, even in the cases described here,
are significant and need to be carefully considered in deciding on the goal of research to be designed and implemented. Although cause and effect may be relatively clear in most of the designs and for the purposes described, single-subject
designs typically cannot distinguish what role the participant’s or the therapist’s
characteristics played in the outcome. So, if hypertensive patients benefited
from the newly designed cognitive-behavioral treatment, was it distinctly because of the treatment? Or, was there something about the energy level and dedication of the therapist, or the receptivity and motivation of the patient that
made the treatment particularly successful? These questions cannot be answered without replication of the studies with new therapists or patients, or in
larger group designs. Yet, many would argue that large group designs also require replication, since their results are based on averages of changes in dependent variables and individual changes are usually not reported.
Relevance of Single-Case Design
Earlier we posed the question, “How does single-subject research methodology
differ from best practices in applied clinical psychology?” It is now time for
your answer and a comparison of these two applications. Relevant to the practice of clinical psychology, the data collected and outcomes generated by this
family of single-subject designs are exactly the type of information sought by
behavioral health care agencies and insurance companies to justify payment for
92 Introduction
treatment, or verification of the outcome of therapy. Because the design of cognitive behavioral therapy relies on systematic and ongoing assessment, monitoring of progress, and follow-up on outcomes, it is often well accepted by
behavioral health care insurance companies for treatment of many common
problems. Later chapters illustrate methods of assessment and treatment that
could be used for therapy as well as in single-subject design research. The important difference between research and therapy, when a distinction needs to
be made, is that research aims to further knowledge about a particular phenomenon (intervention, condition, behavior), and therapy aims to advance the
well-being of an individual. Thus, the desired outcome in research is for the
greater good of psychological science and its consumers; the desired outcome
for therapy is for the better health of the individual and those directly affected
by him or her.
Case studies refer to “the intensive study of the individual” (Kazdin, 2003,
p. 267). As in single-subject designs, individual can refer to one person, one
group, one society, and so on. In contrast to single-subject designs, depending
on how case studies are operationally defined, they may not be methodologically rigorous, and are usually not based on quantitative data. Case study authors provide specific, detailed anecdotal and contextual information, and the
biases of the writer’s perspective or interpretations. Their goal often is to explicate the intricacies of a particular phenomenon, to reflect on the action taken
under specific circumstances or, perhaps, to illustrate the information leading
to the development of a theory. This description may sound similar to that of
the qualitative study, but qualitative designs require preplanned methodology,
are replicable, and are analyzed systematically, often by more than one individual, to achieve consensual validation. Thus, studies based on qualitative
methodology differ significantly from case studies, although they both rely on
narratives, detailed explication of constructs, and possibly qualitative analysis.
The relevance of case studies to clinical psychology is that often people
present with unique and unexplained behaviors, personality patterns, or coping styles that are not documented as disorders or common occurrences, and
best treatments for these individuals are not always evident. Case studies highlight individuality and the relative success (or lack thereof) of the approach
taken by the author. These anecdotes can be useful for contemplating the approach to a similar person. While single-subject designs require preplanned
methodology and prospective study, case studies, as defined here, are often
written retrospectively and are usually not replicable due to their unstructured
or unsystematic methods of information gathering and reporting. So, generalization and even the validity of the outcomes reviewed are often questioned
and sometimes questionable. Confusion in the literature can occur when case
studies are defined more broadly to include single-subject designs or other systematic methodology.
The value of case studies has been acknowledged widely in the clinical
psychology field. Some journals (e.g., Clinical Case Studies) are solely dedicated
to case studies, as are others to single-subject designs. Case studies can be
viewed as a jumping-off point for new ideas, hypotheses, theories, and political action (e.g., the anecdote of one person’s negative experience of ageism in
adoption might lead to further explanation of general practices and state leg-
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 93
islation on the issue, if relevant). Therapy techniques can be developed in response to recognizing unique phenomena that might have significant attributes relevant to a subset of a population or individuals sharing similar
characteristics. Kazdin (2003) also explains the value of case studies that
offer counterinstances, or examples of when a known and accepted therapy
does not work. Furthermore, Kazdin argues the motivational and persuasive
value of case studies as both a value, and as a stimulus for more systematic
and controlled research. Claims made that classical music played during exam
preparation enhanced an individual’s performance significantly from being a
“C” student to being an “A” student might be so compelling to readers that
some consumers will instantly invest in new music collections, whereas investigators (and production companies!) will jump to their computers to
write new research protocols to study the veracity of such claims using experimental designs. Thus, the persuasive ability might be somewhat concerning
when not critically examined (such as testimonials for fad diets), but the generation of more research helps to keep cause and effect, and scientific truth
and fallacy in balance.
Methods Summary
Research of any kind is not perfect. Researchers face the challenge of answering
their questions and examining their hypotheses under optimal circumstances
that allow cause and effect to be determined, and allow their results to be generalized to others. Sometimes this means that quantitative research is conducted with very selective population samples under highly controlled
environments, and sometimes this means selecting a diverse sample and examining their behaviors or responses to changes in the independent variables
(treatment) under conditions as similar to “normal” as possible. There is much
grey in between, and cultural considerations, replicability, feasibility, and the
goals of the research all need to be considered.
Qualitative studies allow more latitude because hypotheses are not clearly
formed at the outset, but rather, questions guide the studies’ development.
Concepts are expected to be expanded, and the results are not necessarily predictable. Single-subject research designs follow in the complexity of the experimental and quasi-experimental designs, and are further limited by the small
sample included. However, their return for answering research questions and
advancing treatment developments and modifications can be outstanding. Case
studies offer a unique contribution to treatment development in their nonmethodological approach to exploring new ideas and concepts in the context of
anecdotal reports of individual experiences. The advancement of clinical science and the expansion of empirically validated, empirically supported, and
manually driven therapies rely on the combination of the methodologies and
studies described so far in this chapter. As we turn to examine the range of
treatment options available for clinicians’ use, and how they are categorized,
studied, and disseminated, your understanding of the complexity of research
and methodologies should allow you to understand why the application of scientific techniques to the study of human behavior and behavioral change
(broadly defined—thoughts, feelings, actions) is so challenging.
94 Introduction
Therapeutic Interventions: Are They All the Same?
The 1990s saw health care reform through the management of care, and mental health professionals were called to task to justify their practices, services,
and outcomes. This has also been true of medical practitioners, but issues directly relating to medicine are not addressed here. Since clinical psychology
both thrives and suffers from grand diversity in theory and practice, the ambiguity of what constitutes “good therapy” highlighted many questions
and called for action from the field. When a field is as wide as mental health
care or even clinical psychology, bringing a profession to consensus is a difficult task.
Imagine you had to organize a discussion about therapeutic best practice
for treating a depressed young adult who has not been attending work for the
past 3 weeks. Your discussion group consists of three psychologists you knew
from your undergraduate training in a room with three of your graduate professors. Then you asked volunteers from yet a different theoretical prospective
to join the discussion. Would you gain agreement on steps to take? Maybe, but
it is more likely you would not. Now, offer the same group the opportunity to
design treatment for a personality-disordered adult. Would the consensus come
easily? It is highly unlikely that it would. Even with the most clear-cut diagnoses and problems, individual differences among the clients and the therapists
would cause variation in treatment plans. How, then, was the field to come to
an agreement on what to support in the face of external challenges? Surely
there was a need to rely on the research literature. Yet, research is more popular among some specialties of therapy (e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy) than
others (e.g., long-term psychoanalysis), and therefore, even this approach was
likely to yield varying responses.
Empirically Supported and Probably Efficacious Treatments
To revert back to the beginning of the movement, the demands from thirdparty payers and the public spawned the development of a task force under Division 12 (Clinical Psychology) of the American Psychological Association and
the leadership of David Barlow. The purpose of the Task Force on Promotion
and Dissemination of Psychological Procedures was “to consider methods to educate clinical psychologists, third party payers and the public about effective
psychotherapies” (APA Division of Clinical Psychology, 1995, p. 3). The task
force delineated two categories of therapies, “Well-Established Treatments,”
and “Probably Efficacious Treatments.” The terms “empirically validated treatments” and “well-established treatments” are often used interchangeably.
Sometimes “empirically supported treatments” refers to the well-established
treatments, and sometimes to those in the probably efficacious group. The criteria for each of these categories are listed in Table 4.1. Note the inclusion and
roles of “experimental designs,” “case studies,” and “single-subject designs.”
The lists of treatments meeting the criteria outlined in Table 4.1 were established on the basis of empirical evidence published in peer-reviewed literature.
The 1995 list of well-established and probably efficacious treatment was ex-
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 95
panded to include additional treatment protocols in 1998 (see Table 4.2). Although the attempt to classify and list effective therapies was a noble starting
point, it was met with much controversy.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy as a paradigm and specialty in clinical psychology is known to be a short-term approach to therapy that is based on treatment manuals for techniques and agendas. Other long-term therapies that rely
more on process-oriented topics and analysis-based interactions are less
amenable to description in a manual and replication. Experimental and quasiexperimental designs, almost by definition, require manualized treatment and
operationally defined interventions to evaluate effectiveness. Without a manual, the independent variable in experimental designs would not be systematically delivered or measurable to determine its impact on the dependent
variable (patient change). Thus, cognitive-behavioral therapies were said to be
overrepresented in the lists of established and efficacious treatments, and other
therapies were not well represented (Levant, 2004).
Although the intention of the task force was to educate others about
existing therapies and their credits, perhaps the unintentional consequence
was that some therapies were assumed to be ineffective or not valid versus
not validated or lacking evidence because empirical evidence was not available. Third-party payers, laypersons, and perhaps some clinicians may have
Table 4.1 Criteria for “Well-Established” and “Probably Efficacious”
Treatment, According to the APA Division 12 Task Force
Well-Established Treatments Probably Efficacious Treatments
1. Group studies by different investigators
demonstrating efficacy by (a) showing
superiority to pill, psychological placebo,
or another treatment, or (b) demonstrating equivalency to an established treatment with adequate statistical power
(n = 30/group)
Two studies showing treatment is
more effective than a waiting-list
control group; or
2. A large series of well-designed single case
studies compared with a 1(a) treatment
and demonstrating efficacy, with
Studies otherwise meeting the wellestablished criteria 1, 3, and 4; or
3. Treatment manuals, and At least two good studies demonstrating effectiveness but flawed by client
sample heterogeneity; or
4. Clear specification of client samples. A small series of single-case design
studies otherwise meeting the wellestablished treatment criteria 2, 3,
and 4.
Source: Task Force, 1995, APA Division of Clinical Psychology, p. 3.
Table 4.2 Well-Established and Probably Efficacious Treatments as
Defined and Listed by the Division 12 Task Force
Well-Established
Treatments
Probably Efficacious
Treatments
Beck’s cognitive therapy for depression Applied relaxation for panic disorder
Behavior modification for the developmentally disabled
Brief psychodynamic therapies
Behavior modification for enuresis and
encopresis
Behavior modification for sexual
offenders
Behavioral therapy for headache and
irritable bowel syndrome
Dialectical behavior therapy for Borderline Personality Disorder
Behavioral therapy for male and female
sexual dysfunction
Emotionally focused couples therapy
Behavioral marital therapy Habit reversal and control techniques
Cognitive therapy for chronic pain Lewinsohn’s psychoeducational treatment for depression
Cognitive therapy for Panic Disorder (with
or without agoraphobia)
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Exposure treatment for phobias (agoraphobia, social phobia, simple phobia, and PTSD)
Exposure and response prevention for
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Family therapy for Schizophrenia per
Hogarty or Falloon
Interpersonal therapy for bulimia
Klerman and Weissman’s interpersonal
therapy for depression
Parent training for Oppositional Defiant
Disorder
Systematic desensitization for simpl
phobias
Token economy programs
Source: Task Force, 1998, APA Division of Clinical Psychology. Reprinted with permission.
96 Introduction
dichotomized existing therapies prematurely, setting unrealistic expectations
that all therapies must be categorized as empirically validated or empirically
unsupported. This dichotomy might restrict trade or consideration of available
treatments, which ultimately does not serve the best interests of scientific inquiry or service to the public.
A Closer Look at Manuals
So what is a manual exactly? Some people think of treatment manuals as cookbooks, and this is one of the biggest criticisms of the format. “If your client has
agoraphobia, turn to page 15 for instructions on what to do. Worried thoughts?
Please turn to page 21.” Therapy would sure be a lot easier if treatment decisions and implementation were so straightforward. Even the best manual cannot address all the nuances of individual differences, but manuals should
provide specific information about the parameters of the treatment. A manual
should indicate for whom the treatment is appropriate. Has research shown
that the treatment is more or less effective with a certain age or ethnic group?
Has it been tested with heterogeneous samples, or is that a recognized caution?
What should be done if the patient has comorbid psychological disorders? In
what sequence should the treatment be delivered? Is it contraindicated or acceptable if the client is also taking psychotropic medications or medications for
medical illnesses?
What are other useful ingredients in treatment manuals? Many manuals
contain session-by-session objectives, goals, and homework assignments. It is
helpful when manuals indicate what diagnostic criteria should be used to determine the emphasis of the treatment delivery. Scripts and handouts for clients
also help maximize reliability and transfer of information from the therapist to
clients. Handouts might include bulleted or expansive explanations of information discussed during a therapy session, worksheets to practice skills learned in
therapy, or record sheets that provide a format for between-session data collection by the client on thoughts, feelings, behaviors, interactions, or other information. Some manuals provide sample explanations therapists can use to
approach client issues, and others provide analogies or perhaps even mnemonics to aid in comprehension or retention of information for the patient. Troubleshooting guides, pertinent decision-making questions, and examples of how
treatments can be modified for nontraditional therapy settings, persons with
different characteristics than those who participated in validation of the manual, or perhaps, tips on how to modify treatment for delivery in a different
modality (e.g., group, couples) are all helpful sections that might be included.
With the use of technology, treatment manuals are also now incorporating
web-based information, online exercises, and other resources. Some manuals
include a compact disk with clinical forms that purchasers can use in their personal practice. The many benefits of manualized treatment seem obvious from
the description of their text. Just the time savings for creating patient handouts
and resource guides is a significant benefit.
If all the preceding information is provided in a manual, then you might
wonder why clients could not use such books as self-help tools. The truth is
that many self-help books include much of the same material as some treatment manuals. For a small subset of the mental health consumer population,
self-help books might be sufficient to change problematic thinking or behaviors. For many, however, lack of motivation, feelings of desperation, or the impairment the disorder has caused in home, work, or social environments is too
significant to be treated without professional help. Likewise, if treatment manuals are so inclusive and precise, why is there controversy in the field about
their use? Shouldn’t any professional be able to read a manual and deliver its
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 97
98 Introduction
contents effectively? Perhaps you have begun to identify some of the potential
criticisms of manualized treatments. The following discussion alerts you to
some of these possible limitations.
The Science in the Practice and the Practice of the Science
In reality, what we know from the literature is that the scientific validation of
therapies is still immature. Many therapies have not yet been tested, and those
that have been are tested with a restricted sample (those with pure diagnoses
and no comorbid diagnoses, which is actually atypical in mental health clients;
homogeneous groups lacking ethnic and cultural diversity) and often in artificial environments (university-based settings versus community-based clinics or
private practices). Given these limitations, the generalization of findings from
empirical studies is also restricted. This argument is not to discredit the scientific integrity of existing research on manualized treatments and techniques. It
is intended to highlight the limits of our knowledge about what works and
what does not work for specific disorders in persons with varying individual
characteristics, in varied settings, delivered by a wide range of therapists with
varying talents, characteristics, and abilities.
In fact, some research (Lambert & Barley, 2001, as cited by Levant, 2004)
suggests, “Specific techniques (namely, those that were the focus of the Division 12 Task Force report) accounted for no more than 15% of the variance in
therapy outcomes” (Levant, 2004, p. 221). More of the variance in therapy outcomes (as much as 30%) was explained by the characteristics and relationships
between therapists and clients (Levant, 2004) and factors common to all therapies (warmth, genuineness, positive regard), including helping patients to confront or face problems (Weinberger, 1995). These statistics resulted from the
Task Force on Empirically Supported Therapy Relationships, which was developed in 1999 by John Norcross, then president of Division 29 (Psychotherapy)
of the American Psychological Association.
So, if evidence indicates that therapy is generally effective, that some approaches are more effective than others but the difference explained is only approximately 15%, should treatment be restricted to empirically validated
protocols or manual-based therapies from the Division 12 task force list? Thirdparty payers would certainly have an easier time deciding what is valid for reimbursement if therapy decision making was that simple. However, Reisner
(2005) astutely points out, “Much can be said for actuarial decision making,
(but) it is the therapist who decides, moment to moment, when to talk and
when to listen, what technique to use and why, and as Linehan (1993) discusses, when to accept and when to encourage change. A technique or set of
techniques cannot substitute for a therapist’s judgment or make the therapist
more empathic or caring” (p. 10 of online version).
Treatment manuals cannot teach therapists how to think, when to challenge a client, or when to gently sit back and observe the interpersonal dynamics of the session as the therapy unfolds. Therapists’ styles vary greatly, as they
probably should. Thus, use of humor may be appropriate and effective for one
therapist-client dyad at a given moment, and not for another dyad or at another
juncture. Manuals cannot adequately teach clinicians how to engage in the
Clinical Research and Outcome Assessment 99
common factors of treatment, or convey the importance of implementing the
strategies of the manual in a common factors context.
The combination of best practice techniques, clinical skills and judgment,
and therapist’s characteristics are critical elements in successful therapy. Some
of these ingredients can be manualized and taught systematically, others cannot. Many therapies have been tested by randomized clinical trials and experimental designs, and many therapies have yet to be evaluated in this way. The
field has recognized that only a subset of therapies for a subset of disorders has
been examined in these ways. This does not mean that only these therapies are
empirically valid for use, or that randomized clinical trials are the only way to
evaluate therapies. From these realizations evolved the application of the medical terminology, “evidence-based medicine” to that of psychological treatments
and practice.
Evidence-Based Practice and Case-Based Research
In the beginning of this chapter, the argument was made that multiple research
designs contribute to the advancement of clinical psychology through developing and evaluating treatment options. Scholars (Edwards, Dattilio, & Bromley,
2004) promulgating a holistic model of the development of clinical knowledge
illustrate how practitioners’, scholars’, and researchers’ work interface for the
development of theory, treatment, randomized clinical trials (RCTs), and empirical tests of these treatments, and case-based refinement of empirically supported treatments. Evidence-based practice results from consideration and
integration of these knowledge sources. Therefore, evidence-based practice is
more than just the use of empirically supported treatments. Sackett, Rosenberg, Gray, Haynes, and Richardson (1996) define evidence-based practice as,
“the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients, [which] means integrating
individual clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence
from systematic research” (p. 71). According to Edwards et al. (2004), this requires consideration of experimental literature and case-based research.
Edwards et al. (2004) assert that clinical practice and science are “partners” (p. 590) in the development of clinical knowledge. According to their
model, clinical practice includes case-based clinical observations, supervision,
and professional discussion based on theoretical principles and science, and it
results in refinement of clinical theory, development of constructs and hypotheses, and new science. Sharing case-based observations through case conferences and publications is encouraged so that other perspectives can be
openly solicited. Case-based research in this model is broadly defined to include
single-subject designs that use qualitative or quantitative strategies, generated
prospectively or retrospectively. Numerous case-based observations together
may lead to development of new clinical treatment models. These can then lead
to treatment manuals to be tested in RCTs that, in turn, allow clinical treatment
models to be scrutinized according to scientific principles and research methodology, and often yield additional experimental studies. According to this model,
the studies inform or challenge applied clinical theory, which, in turn, should
influence and inform clinical practice. What develops from these reciprocal
interactions is “evidence-based medicine” and advancement of clinical psychology knowledge. Edwards and colleagues appear to have resurrected and applied
the defined “scientist-practitioner model” of training to the actual science and
practice of clinical psychology. Their connection of the subfields of clinical psychology is masterful in helping readers understand how the pieces of the clinical psychology jigsaw puzzle may fit together.
As you are discovering your niche in clinical psychology and are beginning to ground yourself in a pattern of thought about your potential role in the
field, the discussion of evidence-based medicine and case-based research might
seem obvious and simple. Certainly, the model seems clear, so perhaps the controversial aspects of this model are not. If this is where you find yourself, take a
moment and enjoy your perspective.
Many researchers argue against the proposed model or those similar to it,
because of all the arguments provided earlier in the chapter against case studies and single-subject designs. However, those in favor of case-based research,
and those who appreciate that theory can be grounded (Strauss & Corbin,
1994) or steeped in case example, also suggest that operational definitions can
be developed and generalizations can be made from a compilation of casebased data. Some argue that researchers undervalue case-based data and tend
to minimize the significant problems associated with RCTs and experimental
designs. After all, the data generated by experimental study of clinical therapies
is often based on self-report results of pencil-and-paper instruments that have
widely varying degrees of reliability and construct validity. In fact, the instruments used to obtain the data provide a another whole source of bias, restriction of information, and error. But that story is for another day.
These arguments can give you a flavor of the challenges that face clinical
psychology in today’s search for best treatment practices. There is plenty
of material in the literature that criticizes or defends case-based research or
that criticizes or defends experimental designs, RCTs, and quantitative research
strategies. Perhaps we should be mindful of Edwards et al.’s (2004) quote
of Kiesler’s (1981, p. 213) work stating, “all research is flawed . . . scientific
progress results from repeated empirical attacks on a problem . . . no single
study . . . is worth much in and of itself.”
Summary
Many educators, scientists, and clinicians would agree that we should not throw
out the baby with the bathwater. Efforts to empirically validate the methods
used in psychotherapy are critical to the advancement, acceptance, and development of the field of clinical psychology, but they do not provide the total answer. Likewise, clinical practice, experience, and consideration of individual

You may have heard, “Everyone can profit from therapy,” or “Everyone
needs psychotherapy.” Neither of these is correct. Not everyone needs
psychotherapy nor can everyone profit from the experience. What then makes
a person decide to become a patient or client? Who actually might need therapy? In this chapter, we explore the reasons a person seeks or gets referred for
psychotherapy.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• List the 12 most common reasons that people seek psychological help.
• Explain at least four differences between normal and abnormal behavior.
• Describe the multiaxial diagnostic systems of DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10.
• Discuss how psychopathology and functional behavior are connected.
• Identify disorders that are usually first diagnosed in childhood.
• Describe the difference between major symptomatic disorders and personality disorders.
Edward was very worried about germs and possible contamination. When
he washed his hands (which he did several times a day), he washed with a stiff
scrub brush and a special germicidal soap. He would wet his hands, soap them,
scrub them, rinse them and then soap, scrub, and rinse several more times.
Alice was always scanning for danger. She rarely saw anything dangerous,
but she was always on her guard. She looked at people’s faces for some hint of
104 Introduction
danger. She would scrutinize their bodies without any sexual interest, looking
for hidden weapons. She watched for body language that might signal the person was a terrorist.
Tim appreciated his job. He worked alone, lived alone, and only saw other
people about once every 3 months when he had to deal with them to restock
his pantry. He preferred his books, classical music CDs, and online activity.
Sonia loved attention. She bought outlandish outfits knowing that this
attire would make everyone stare at her. At one point, it was a skimpy bathing
suit that was so daring, everyone was startled when she wore it. At other
times, she wore outfits that covered her body from head to toe in a garish mix
of colors.
Eric was a perfectionist. He did not accept “close” to perfection as an acceptable conclusion of any task. He believed that he could not just be near the
mark, but must always be right on the mark. He demanded of himself and others that perfection was the only acceptable goal.
None of these people came for therapy, at least not for the preceding behavioral patterns. None of these people saw the need to change what they did.
Edward was a surgeon, Tim was the caretaker of a lighthouse, Alice was in
charge of airport security at a large metropolitan airport, Sonia was an actress,
and Eric was a neurosurgeon.
Understanding Why People Become Patients
At least 12 common D-words describe the reasons people seek therapy. These
include the individual, family, or couple being Discomforted, Discontented,
Distressed, Disabled, Dysfunctional, Disconnected, Dispirited, Disorganized, Distraught, Dissatisfied, Dyscontrolled, and Disgusted. All these descriptive terms
refer to mood states that are unpleasant and perhaps frightening to the person
experiencing the mood and possibly to those around him or her. Not only is the
mood or affective state an inherently aversive experience, these states can preclude or interfere with other moods and interactions that would be more beneficial. Imagine that you are thinking about going to a party, but you feel generally
dispirited and disconnected. Perhaps you will find just the antidote to those feelings at the social function. Or it may be that you scarcely notice who or what is
going on around you because of your negative preoccupation. As a result, you interact poorly and tend to turn others away. Others mutter about your “weird” attitude and behavior. When “D-word” moods are prolonged, the impact on a
person’s general functioning and quality of life and health can be enormous.
Describing Normal versus Abnormal Behavior
The operational definitions of normal and abnormal may be a function of time,
culture, geography, or style. If one were to wear an exceptionally brief bathing
suit, it might be viewed appreciatively on the French Riviera, but would be unacceptable in another country. In some groups, wearing a garment that exposes
Why People Become Patients 105
any part of the body would be considered inappropriate or even illegal. A
bathing suit that would be acceptable according to today’s standards might have
gotten someone arrested 40 years ago at the very same beach.
Speaking in tongues, seizure-like body movements, and drooling might be
labeled as abnormal in one setting and as religious fervor in another. Is the correct interpretation of this behavior religious rapture, psychological decompensation, or neurological problems? Although an operational definition for
abnormal is essential to understanding psychopathology, we must admit from
the beginning that we are stuck. There are a multitude of definitions that are
based in culture, philosophy, religion, or politics. Szasz (1984, 1988, 1997) saw
the term and the construct of mental illness as a way for society to control its
members. Those who did not conform to the demands and expectations of the
dominant society were seen as mentally ill. Probably the best example of
Szasz’s idea would be in countries that see their political system as perfect and
unassailable despite visible and contrary data. Anyone, therefore, who is dissident to their country’s “perfect system” must be (by definition) mentally ill.
They would then need to be immediately placed in a secure psychiatric facility
to have their “illness” treated.
We have come a long way from assessing people as being possessed by
demons to explain their behavior. We recognize biological, sociological, and
psychological reasons for behavior that deviates from the societal norm. None
of these explanatory models can offer a total answer. As is often the case, numerous combinations and permutations of factors explain behavior. Behavior
may be caused or influenced by biogenetic factors, the genotype. The observed
behavior is identified as the phenotype. There may be environmental and social
factors that impact and impinge on the individual, the sociotype.
Problems emerge when a person’s behavior noticeably interferes with
what they are trying to do. What gets noticed in one setting may be easily and
quickly overlooked in another. One of the caveats that we offer in any discussion of psychopathology is that there may not be a single standard that transcends all people, at all times, in all circumstances. With every individual, we
have to take great care to evaluate that individual’s strengths, coping abilities,
and personal attributes, in addition to problems and problem areas.
It is negative behavior, or behavior that has a negative outcome, that most
often brings someone into psychotherapy. Simply, the behavior is causing problems both within the person and with others. Individuals who are very dependent may gather people around them who provide care. They may not perceive
this as a problem nor would they see depending on others as negative. If, however, they lose their support system for any reason, then their dependence may
have a negative effect because they feel abandoned. Individuals often come
with the complaint that they need to get their lives together, get their head together, or take control of their life.
Among the most important diagnostic factors is the ability of the individual to develop and use a broad range of actions and reactions. Over time, each
of us develops and maintains a repertoire of reactions to various internal and
external stimuli. The person with a limited repertoire of behaviors is more
likely to have a difficulty that triggers one of the 12 D-word moods. They try to
use the same responses in most situations no matter whether the responses fit.
106 Introduction
If life for an individual is very limited and tightly controlled, this may not be a
problem. For example, in the military, what one wore (a uniform), how one
wore it, when one wore it, and the proper care of that uniform would be set
out by rules, custom, and regulations. A person with a limited repertoire may
be very adaptive as long as the situation remains the same. When life changes,
or when circumstances demand a greater variety of responses the same person
may not effectively cope.
Kenneth, aged 66, sought therapy because of his depression. He reported
that he had been depressed for most of his life. On several occasions, he had
sought therapy and after varying amounts of time, had terminated it when he
felt less depressed. When questioned by his current therapist as to whether he
had ever been happy, he quickly replied, “Yes, when I was drafted into the
army at age 18. I was sent to Europe in 1958. It was wonderful!” When asked
what made it wonderful, Ken replied, “It was so easy to live there. I never had
to worry about what to wear, what to do, where to eat, what to eat, where to
live, or even when to get up and when to sleep. It was the perfect life.” When
asked if it was always like that, Ken replied, “No. There was a time when several of us were told to go to a town in Germany to help build a school. We were
told to wear civvies so as not to stand out too much. I hated that. We lived in a
local hotel and ate at various restaurants. I never knew what to wear or what to
order. The other guys made fun of me because I wore the same thing every
day.” Ken had limited internal resources.
Some individuals might have perceived Ken’s assignment as wonderful.
For some, living at a hotel as opposed to a barracks was heaven. Having a private room and bath as opposed to community living and latrines was wonderful. They could eat at any restaurant and choose their meals without having to
pay for them as opposed to eating in a mess hall. For Ken, this was torture and
he could not wait to return to his unit and to the army regimen. Because of a
limited repertoire of different choices and actions, his behavior became ritualized and compulsive. Even when his actions did not produce the desired results, he continued to act in the same way. He would even complain about how
he longed to return to the unit, which his buddies simply did not understand.
Related to the compulsive nature of such behavior is that these individuals are inflexible in dealing with problems and with people. When invited to
try a different approach to coping with problems, their likely response is that
they have always done it in the same way and are reluctant or insistent that
they should not have to change what they do. Again, even when their approach
does not work, they maintain the same inflexible approach.
On returning to civilian life, Ken studied electrical engineering, and over
the years he was moderately successful. His work was not conceptual or innovative. Rather, it involved technical production of models designed by others.
Being told what to do was what he wanted. Did this style contribute to his depression? Or, was the major factor in his depression the reality that the world
cannot always be regular and predictable?
For other individuals, the difficulty stems from their manner of approaching interpersonal or intrapersonal difficulties. Their approach to problem solving may be described as “thoughtless.” By thoughtless, we do not mean that
they cannot or do not think or that they are necessarily cognitively challenged.
Why People Become Patients 107
Rather, their behavioral responses appear to be “automatic.” Essentially, their
lives operate in a stimulus-to-response mode. Having always responded in
a particular manner, they continue to do so, even if the situation warrants a
different response. They do not seem to make choices but try to make one size
fit all.
Lisa had always been shy. She avoided situations where she would be the
center of attention. She had always managed to remain in the background in
classes and now at her work. When offered a promotion with a sizable salary
increase, Lisa was torn. Should she accept it or stay “safe” in the background.
Her life circumstances required that she earn more money to help pay for her
mother’s medical care. She accepted the position, but after 3 weeks was called
into her supervisor’s office and told that she could not keep her office door
closed and communicate with her staff via e-mail. She had to have weekly
staff meetings, and interact with her staff. The ensuing anxiety brought Lisa to
seek therapy.
For some individuals, their actions are often so noticeable to others that
the individual gets marked and colored by their own behavior. Probably the
simplest example is driving according to the speed limit. Many people accept as
a fact that driving no more than 5 miles over the posted speed limit is okay. By
what authority is this okay? Has anyone ever seen in writing, a rule that says
any driver can exceed the speed limit by 5 miles without penalty? Likely not!
The myth comes from the personal experience we have all had of driving 5
miles over the posted speed without repercussions. However, if we drive 10 or
more miles over the speed limit and pass all those driving only 5 miles over the
speed limit, we are more noticeable. Subsequent to being noticed, we may face
censure, anger, retribution, and revenge. We may, in fact, be forced to pay a
fine by the agents of our society, the criminal justice system.
This leads to the next factor, the individual’s behaviors, thoughts, and feelings being extreme. What is most likely seen as “normal” is behavior, thoughts,
and feelings that tend to be moderate. It is wonderful to feel good, but it can
become euphoria that leads to dangerous actions.
Susan, aged 20, sought therapy because of her anxiety. She announced to
the therapist that she wanted to be cured of her anxiety. She reported that it
kept her from sleeping, interfered with her school performance, negatively impacted her social life, and made relating to peers difficult. The problem with
trying to rid Susan of all her anxiety was that it might leave her amotivational.
Too little anxiety and there may not be motivation to study. Too much anxiety
could interfere with studying and with memory. Ideally, to become normal,
Susan would move her anxiety from the extreme to a more moderate point.
There will always be people at the extremes of the normal curve. The majority
of individuals are between −1 and +1 standard deviations.
The issue of adaptation is another key concept. How adaptive are people to
their environment and situation? The person who seeks clinical services is
more likely to experience some form of maladaptive behavior. Sometimes actions or thoughts that worked at some earlier point in life stop working or the
new situation calls for a shift in thinking, action, or affect. Using Piaget’s idea,
adaptation is an interaction between assimilation and accommodation. Assimilation refers to the incorporation of new information into existing schemas
108 Introduction
(using old schemas in new situations). This helps to give the world some predictability and context. Accommodation involves the alteration of an old
schema to account for new information. This allows an expanded understanding of the world.
Another problem may emerge when individuals are in tune with a small
subpart of the larger community. They may have no problems as long as they
stay in their small community. It is when they are at odds with the larger community that they come to our attention. The subculture may be the family, the
neighborhood, the town, or the local community. Children who have been reinforced for not speaking and for using hand signals and grunts at home to get
what they desire will not be treated the same way once they go to school, but
will be expected to speak and participate in the life of the class.
Paul was born and raised in a small ethnic enclave in a large eastern city.
He spoke his parents’ native language at home and with his friends and neighbors. He went to a parochial school in his neighborhood and attended his local
parish church which was also an ethnic church. After graduating from high
school, he went to a state college at some distance from his home. He chose the
college because of its excellent program in his area of interest. After one term,
he was so upset and unhappy that he left the school, and later he enrolled in a
small college near his home. Although it did not have the program that he
wanted, he stayed through to graduation and chose another area of specialization because he felt comfortable with the culture of the smaller college.
Large parts of maladaptive patterns may be self-consonant. That is, these
individuals may not see their behavior as abnormal. They may see their problem
as the ill will or negative behaviors of others. Their sentences often begin with,
“If only they . . .” People who see their behavior as reasonable and appropriate,
despite evidence to the contrary, will not only avoid therapy, but may have
great difficulty when forced to be involved in therapy.
Evan was a tenured college professor who had earned a doctorate in history from a prestigious university. He was infamous among the students for his
veiled sexist comments and innuendos in his classes. Many colleagues, male
and female, had asked him to be careful with his comments inasmuch as they
could be taken as harassment. After he made a particularly egregious comment, his behavior was finally reported and a grievance was filed. He denied
any negative intent and tried to dismiss the grievance as the product of “poor
sports,” “people without a sense of humor,” or the college administration pandering to the “God of political correctness.” After an investigation, he was
placed on administrative leave and told that he would have to participate in
several months of weekly one-on-one sexual harassment counseling. At the
end of that time, the counselor would report back on the result of the counseling. After the counseling was completed, the counselor reported that in every
session, Evan insisted that he had done nothing wrong, that he was unfairly
being singled out for punishment by a “radical, lesbian, feminist cabal” at the
college. He was fired for cause, and after some legal interaction, left the college.
The final two pieces relate to the areas of concern or conflict. The interpersonal issues are those issues that affect others. For the sake of our discussion, we can group problems into interpersonal (between the individual and
those in that individual’s surroundings) and intrapersonal (problems that are
troubling for the individual). There is a bidirectional influence between the in-
Why People Become Patients 109
terpersonal and intrapersonal domains. If an individual who experiences depression may be sad and filled with self-loathing (“I’m worthless. I would be
better off dead.”), this depression may also influence others in the family (“I
hate to be with you when you’re like this. I feel so helpless to do anything.”).
Some of the intrapersonal issues are experiences such as being discomforted by feelings, thoughts, or experience (“I try to avoid driving over bridges.
I can do it if there is no other way, but I would drive 10 miles out of my way to
avoid driving across a bridge.”). We may feel discontented. We view our lives or
experience and ask, “Is this all that there is?” We may be distressed by internal
or external stimuli (“I am lost since my girlfriend left me. I wander around with
no direction.”).
When the experience is severe, we may become disabled. This might be
seen in an individual’s functioning decreasing to a point of no apparent function (“I just cannot get out of bed. I lie there for hours.”). This is both quantitatively and qualitatively different from the intrapersonal experience of being
dysfunctional where the individual’s usual level of function is decreased (“I just
have to push myself to get anything done. I get it done, but it is so hard.”).
Sometimes the intrapersonal issue is feeling disconnected from people and
experiences that surround us. (“I was at the party and people were trying to be
friendly but it felt as if I had a wall up.”). At times, we may feel dispirited. (“I
try and try to do well but nothing that I try seems to work.”). We may experience danger and great anguish and feel distressed (“I just know that some great
calamity will fall on me.”). When we cannot figure out what direction to go in,
or when we are doubtful about what to do, we may feel distraught (“What shall
I do? I can’t stay, and I can’t go, I’m stuck in the middle.”). There are times that
we are dissatisfied with our present experience. (“I want more!”), or disgusted
with the actions of others or the turn of affairs (I can’t stand her; this just
makes me sick!). When we do things that we know are negative and for which
we will pay a price, we may be dyscontrolled (“I know that the drinking is no
good for me but once I start, I can’t stop.”). Finally, we may be disorganized
(“Everything that I need to do is spread across six continents, and I can’t seem
to get my act together.”).
These mood experiences are more the norm than the exception. We have
all had these moods in some form, at some time, for some duration, with some
impact. Again, we need to delineate between those problems that are part of
living and development and those that bring someone to the attention of the
medico-legal system. Specifically, what will bring that individual in to see a
clinical psychologist?
Biological Perspectives
In what seems to us in the twenty-first century to be a rather quaint and interesting idea, the phrenologists of the eighteenth century “discovered” that certain attributes of personality or general functioning could be localized in the
brain. The more that a particular faculty was exercised, it would, like a muscle,
grow and show up as it pressed against the skull to raise bumps. Similarly, an
underused faculty would atrophy and result in a depressed area of the skull.
For example, reach back to the base of your skull. Is there a bump or a depressed area? This is the area identified by phrenologists as “amativeness.” If
110 Introduction
you have a large bump in this area you can be phrenologically certain that you
are high on amativeness. Or, possibly low on that faculty. Contemporary terminology labels amativeness as sexuality, defined as attraction to and attractiveness to others for sexual purposes. You might want to assess that again.
The biological view looks at brain function in terms of brain structures,
brain circuitry, and brain chemistry. The interaction of the brain with the endocrine system, the autonomic nervous system, the sensory input systems, the
muscles, digestive tract, and respiratory system is well known to us. Terms
such as “nervous stomach,” “a case of nerves,” “heartache,” “butterflies in the
stomach,” or “nervous twitch” are familiar to us. We understand these descriptive metaphors for the effect of emotion and cognition on our bodies. A cognitive therapist may ask about the thoughts in your head, a Gestalt therapist
might ask for the feelings in your heart. The emotions are, however, more related to the hypothalamus, the cortex, and the limbic system. The amygdala,
part of the limbic system, serves the function of evaluating a stimulus for its
emotional valence.
The frontal lobes of the cortex control abstract thought, focus of attention,
the ability to plan and sequence behaviors, and social adjustment, and some aspects of personality. Individuals who sustain frontal lobe damage may have
great difficulty in controlling their verbal or motor behavior, possibly being aggressive with very slight provocation. Postinjury, previously shy and inhibited
individuals may become grandiose and inappropriate. Previously reluctant or
unable to step forward, they now may demand center stage. They may say socially inappropriate things, tell off-color jokes, and generally have a personality
change. This change is not reversible, and the social controls that were previously coded and controlled by the frontal lobes seem to be turned off.
The technique of prefrontal lobotomy was once used as a means of controlling behavior. This involved cutting the connection between the right and
left frontal lobes. The desired reaction was to make excited and out-of-control
patients less excitable and more easily controlled. The result of calming was not
always achieved and what occurred more often was a “flattening” of the emotions. This technique is rarely used today for controlling behavior, though it has
been used for seizure activity that cannot be controlled by medication.
Similarly, individuals with damage to the temporal lobes of the cortex
that result in uncontrolled electrical output that we label as seizures may act in
antisocial ways, without recognition or memory of the acts.
“What a rush! We were doing 95 miles per hour, and the road was clear
and straight. It was incredible!” The rush that we experience is a rush of adrenaline. This hormone released by the adrenal glands pours into the bloodstream
and causes a release of glycogen (energy material), and increase in respiration
(increased oxygen for metabolism), an increase in heart rate (to get the glycogen and oxygen around the body as quickly as possible). Again, our emotional
state can be both caused by and cause an emotional interpretation.
Sociological Perspectives
It is extremely rare that anyone lives in a social vacuum. We live within the
social contexts and communities of family, church, school, and peers. Each
context overlaps and interacts with others, to a greater or lesser degree. We
Why People Become Patients 111
act on social context, and that context forms the myriad social schema that direct our behavior. It is not within the framework of this text to fully describe
and discuss these social issues. (For a broader explication of this issue, the
reader is referred to the following texts: Bowers, 2000; Brugha, 1995; Cockersham, 1999; Dubin & Fink, 1992; Horvitz & Scheid, 1999; and Tausig,
Michello, & Subedi, 2003). We know that the social context that a person lives
within can both pressure and support individuals and families. Social disorganization and community breakdown undoubtedly play a significant role in
the development and exacerbation of abnormal or disturbed behavior. Moving
to a new town, a new region of the country, or to a different country can significantly impact how someone feels and how those feelings are interpreted by
the community. Even within a broad community, views of behavior may differ broadly. For example, the Jones brothers, Jim and Joe, go to a local pub
every night for a few beers. They are also known for their loud and raucous
discussions regarding such esoteric topics as, “Who was the best quarterback
in history?” or “What third baseman had the highest batting average of all
time?”. More often than not, the discussions end in a wresting match and an
occasional bloody nose. Regular customers at the pub have learned to ignore
the Jones brothers and step over their wresting bodies. After the wresting,
they usually take time for another beer. However, the Jones brothers were invited to a wedding in an elegant hotel and were arrested when their wrestling
was deemed inappropriate.
Societies often place a stigma on those whose behavior is deviant or
aberrant from the larger group (even our use of terms like deviant, and aberrant are stigmatizing). Dubin and Fink (1992) state, “Mental illness was once
thought to be related to being possessed by demons. In more recent times
such concepts are no longer prevalent. Patients with mental disorders continue to be viewed as constitutionally weak, dangerous, and responsible for
their own plight” (p. 1).
In the classic 1957 musical, West Side Story (written for the stage by Arthur
Laurents and which became a film in 1961), the lyrics to “Gee, Officer Krupke”
(music by Leonard Bernstein and words by Stephen Sondheim) describe the
various problems that might lead to the delinquent behavior of a gang member
and how different societal spokespersons react to this adolescent behavior. (The
song is sung by gang members to the police officer on the beat, Sergeant
Krupke.) The gang members variously blame: parental use of drugs and alcohol, lack of love by parents, child abuse, family member’s gender confusion,
deprivation of love and material possessions at home, parental spousal abuse,
lack of work and career opportunities, and political factors.
Added to this are the views of various mental health professionals, for example, a psychoanalyst views them as needing a career, a social worker believes
that incarceration would be best along with vocational training, and a judge
views the adolescents as deprived. Society’s message to the adolescents is
stated in the conclusion of the song:
We’re no good!
We’re no good!
We’re no earthly good!
Like the best of us is no damn good!
112 Introduction
Social disorganization and community breakdown undoubtedly play a
significant role in the development and exacerbation of abnormal or disturbed
behavior. Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter to offer a review of
community factors, we need to acknowledge the vast impact of social and community stress as well as the mediating effects of social and community support.
Psychological Perspectives
The psychological perspective on normal behavior is rooted in theoretical models of personality. The psychodynamic perspective may differ markedly from
the behavioral perspective which may differ markedly from a Jungian position.
Rather than try to recapitulate a lecture in personality theory, we can say that
the psychological perspective comes from the way in which the individual
processes the stimulus cues, both internal and external. If you were walking
down the street and saw a very huge dog sitting in the middle of the sidewalk
with its lips drawn back in a snarl, what would you do? If you are a trained animal handler you might react by continuing on your way speaking softly and
calmly to the dog. If you were frightened of animals you might run away. A
simplified description of your reaction could be summarized by the following
equation: Risk versus Resources equals Response. Risk is your perception of the
danger to you. Resources are your perception of your abilities to adaptively
cope with the perceived risk. Your response is a product of that ratio.
Are our reactions a result of deeply held beliefs? Probably so! Are these
beliefs hidden away in the dark recesses of our unconscious? Maybe so! Are we
destined to repeat the mistakes of the past unless and until we resolve the conflicts and drives that spur our action? Probably not! Why the lack of certainty?
There are ideas, thoughts, beliefs, needs, expectations, attributions, and explanations that are not easily available to awareness. We simply do not think of
them. They may still have an active role in why we do what we do, what maintains our behavior, and how we can change what we do. For example, why are
we depressed? One psychological perspective is that it relates to how we view
ourselves, our world, and what we predict to be the future effect (cognitive behavioral view). Another widely accepted perspective is that it relates to experiences and perceptions of loss of love objects (object relations view).
The essence of the psychological perspective on why people become patients is that we all experience a series of life events from which we derive
some meaning that subsequently influences our thoughts, actions, and feelings.
This meaning, however it is derived, can precipitate any of the D-Word states
that trigger the quest for therapeutic intervention.
Patients versus Clients
The terminology to denote a person seeking or being part of a psychotherapeutic collaboration has shifted with the political winds. Is the person in therapy
properly termed a patient, a client, or a consumer? Are there differences or is it
a matter of “a rose by any other name would smell as sweet”? Terms in vogue
to describe an individual seeking or involved with mental health services include “patient,” “client,” “customer,” “survivor,” and “consumer.”
Why People Become Patients 113
There have been many concerns about referring to an individual as a patient because doing so places that individual in a “sick,” or “disabled,” role
(Sharma, Whitney, Kazarian, & Manchanda, 2000). A study by Meuser, Glynn,
Corrigan, and Baber (1996) suggested that no single term was preferred by the
users of mental health services. Of their study population, 45% preferred the
term “client,” 20% preferred the term “patient,” 8% preferred the term “consumer,” and 27% either had no preference or preferred another term. In a
replication of the Meuser et al. study, Sharma et al. (2000), found that among
providers of mental health services, 68.4% preferred the term “patient,” 26.5%
preferred the term “client,” and .5% preferred the term “consumer.” Among
service recipients, 54.8% preferred the term “patient,” 28.8% preferred the
term “client,” 7% preferred the term “survivor,” and 2.8% preferred the term
“consumer.” What is clear from these studies is that there is no clear preference
for terms used by providers or recipients of mental health services. The conclusion of both studies is that there is a need for an early, frank discussion between therapists and their “service recipients.”
Specific Types of Problems
People who are anxious or depressed will likely try different remedies in their
attempt to feel better. Some of them sleep, some shop, some incessantly talk on
the telephone. Some will try to feed their troubles and make them go away with
double-fudge rocky road mocha ice cream. Other people will avoid the obvious,
seeking their answers in cyberspace, and still others will use drugs or alcohol to
relieve the pain or discomfort. When and if these “solutions” stop working,
there are problems. Even if the “solutions” work to reduce the upset or depression, the solutions may become the new problem.
Codifying Psychopathology
Over the years, there have been many attempts to develop and maintain a standard coding system for mental problems. The two systems that are used are the
system developed by the World Health Organization entitled the International
Classification of Disease (ICD), and the system developed by the American Psychiatric Association entitled the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM). Presently, ICD is in its tenth edition (ICD-10, 1997), and the DSM is in its
fourth edition, having recently published an edition that revised much of the
descriptive text (DSM-IV-TR, 2000).
DSM is used as the convention in the United States and several countries
around the world. ICD is more widely distributed and used in many countries
throughout the world. When the two are compared, there are many similarities
but also several differences. These differences appear in the terms and titles
used for disorders and also for some of the criteria.
In the “bad old days” of the diagnosis of psychological problems, it was
both easier and harder to diagnose a person’s problem(s). It was easier because
there were no clear rules, criteria, or terms. Clinicians could “mix and match”
114 Introduction
theoretical, descriptive, and diagnostic terms. It was harder because there were
no clear rules, criteria, or terms. Clinicians could easily make up their own diagnoses, mix and match terms, and not easily communicate their diagnosis to
another clinician. DSM-I (1952) states, “There resulted a polyglot of diagnostic
labels and systems, effectively blocking communication and the collection of
medical statistics” (p. v). The New York Academy of Medicine sponsored a conference in March, 1928 that developed a trial edition of a standard nomenclature that was published in 1932. By 1948 the system was in turmoil inasmuch
as the Armed Forces, the Veterans Administration, and the civilian standards
were different. Not substantively so, but different enough that a patient going
from the Army to the VA and then to a civilian hospital might carry different
labels.
In 1948, The World Health Organization published the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death in two volumes. This included not only psychiatric disorders, but all medical disorders. For all
classification systems, the ability to record, code, and classify disorders into set
categories was important for studying prevalence of the manifestation of the
disorder across groups.
In DSM-I (1952), all mental disorders were divided into two major groups:
1. Those in which there is a disturbance of mental function resulting from,
or precipitated by, a primary impairment of the function of the brain, generally due to a diffuse impairment of brain tissue; and
2. Those which are the result of a more general difficulty in adaptation of
the individual, and in which any associated brain function disturbance is
secondary to the psychiatric disorder (p. 9).
DSM-I covered the definition of terms for all disorders in 31 pages
(pp. 12–43). DSM-II (1968) was published as a collaborative effort with WHO,
which had published the eighth edition of ICD. By 1968, the definition of terms
was 38 pages in length. DSM-II offered greater specificity and attempted to clarify some basic concepts. As a point of comparison, we can examine the DSM-I
diagnosis termed “Sociopathic Personality Disturbance.” Individuals in this category were described as, “ill primarily in terms of society and of conformity
with the prevailing social milieu, and not only in terms of personal discomfort
and relations with other individuals. However, sociopathic reactions are very
often symptomatic of severe underlying personality disorder, neurosis, or psychosis, or occur as the result of organic brain injury or disease. Before a definitive diagnosis in this group is employed, strict attention must be paid to the
possibility of the presence of a more primary personality disturbance; such underlying disturbance will be diagnosed when recognized. Reactions will be differentiated as defined below.” (p. 38). This was then followed by the categories
of Antisocial Reaction, referring to people who are “always in trouble,” Dyssocial
Reaction, “individuals who manifest disregard for the usual social codes,” and
Sexual Deviation, “such as homosexuality, transvestitism, pedophilia, fetishism,
and sexual sadism” (pp. 38–39).
Both DSM-I and DSM-II were based in psychodynamic theory. As a definition for Psychoneurotic Disorders, DSM-I states, “The chief characteristic of
Why People Become Patients 115
these disorders is anxiety which may be directly felt and expressed or which
may be unconsciously and automatically controlled by the utilization of various defense mechanisms (depression, conversion, displacement, etc.)” (p. 31).
DSM-II (1968) uses the exact wording as a definition of the term Neuroses
(p. 39).
With the publication of DSM-III in 1980, the profession had done away
with the term neurosis. The new term was disorder. The disorders were no
longer defined in the psychodynamic light of expressions of anxiety, but rather
as criteria that were more behaviorally based. Each disorder now had a series of
criteria that limited the freedom for clinicians to interpret and adjust the categories. For the first time, clinicians had to stay with the criteria sets as defining
a particular disorder. The definitions of disorders now ran from page 35 to page
335, a total of 300 pages, or roughly 10 times the number of pages devoted to
definitions in the previous text.
Another important change in DSM-III was the idea of diagnosing an individual on five separate axes. This multiaxial diagnosis allowed the clinician to
identify and code, “aspects of the environment, and areas of functioning that
might be overlooked if the focus was on assessing a single presenting problem.”
(p. 23). The five axes were
• Axis I Clinical Syndromes
• Axis II Personality Disorders
• Specific Developmental Disorders
• Axis III Physical Disorders and Problems
• Axis IV Severity of Psychosocial Stressors
• Axis V Highest Level of Adaptive Functioning in the Past Year
Conditions not attributable to a mental disorder might still be a focus of
attention or treatment and would be coded with a descriptive “V Code.”
To continue our comparison, Antisocial Personality Disorder is defined
in DSM-III (1980) as, “a Personality Disorder in which there are a history of
continuous and chronic antisocial behavior in which the rights of others are
violated” (p. 318). The definition no longer includes sexual deviation. Homosexuality is only diagnosed when it is ego-dystonic (the individual is unhappy
or displeased with his or her homosexuality).
In 1983, DSM-III was revised as DSM-III-R. The reason for this rather rapid
revision was that, “the data were emerging from new studies that were inconsistent with some of the diagnostic criteria.” In addition, there were “many instances in which the criteria were not entirely clear, were inconsistent across
categories, or were even contradictory” (p. xvii). In DSM-III-R, the criteria sets
(definitions now take up 336 pages, another 10% increase), Antisocial Personality Disorder is now defined as, “a pattern of irresponsible and antisocial behavior beginning in childhood or early adolescence and continuing into
adulthood” (p. 342).
When DSM-IV was published in 1994, the definition of terms had swelled
to an astounding 650 pages. The description of Antisocial Personality Disorder
is the same, though some criteria differ from DSM-III-R.
116 Introduction
Finally, DSM-IV-TR was published in 2000. The criteria sets are generally
unchanged but there is a substantial revision of the descriptions, features, cultural, age, and gender differences, associated features, prevalence, course of the
disorder, familial pattern, and differential diagnosis. The definition of terms
covers 703 pages. Now we have good news and bad news. The good news is that
there will continue to be increasing specificity in succeeding volumes of DSM
throughout your career as a psychologist. DSM-V is due in 2012. Given the continuous size increase, the bad news is that the sheer weight of DSM in the future will surely cause major muscle strain.
The Range of Disorders
DSM is an evolving concept and document. The students reading this book will,
in the course of their career, likely meet several revisions of the manual. We
cannot, in the context of this chapter offer an in-depth discussion of the broad
range of mental disorders. For an excellent view or review of psychopathology,
see Kring, Davison, Neale, and Johnson(2006).
To acquaint the reader with why people become specific kinds of patients,
we offer the fledgling clinician an overview of the current diagnostic nomenclature and its categories of psychopathology.
Before we begin, we want to emphasize three points. First, not everyone
will fit neatly into a single category or diagnostic group. Second, we are emphasizing the disorders that are most commonly seen in clinical practice. The DSM
has many, many more that are unusual or even rare. A fuller description and diagnostic markers for these disorders are the purview of another course in
psychopathology or advanced abnormal psychology. Finally, and by far the most
important consideration is for the student to be aware of the most dreaded and
dreadful emotional or mental disorder that has ever been observed. It is simply
called “The Student’s Disease.” Generally, it is first manifested in the undergraduate years during the Introductory Psychology course when studying the chapter on abnormal psychology. It is often exacerbated in the later undergraduate
years or early graduate years when taking a course specific to psychopathology.
It is at this point that the disease strikes with its full weight. The student see him
or herself (or some significant other) in every diagnostic category. They become
upset (or obsessed) with having diseases that will likely render them incapacitated in a short period of time. As you go through the next pages, BEWARE!
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood,
or Adolescence
Mental Retardation
You have likely heard someone demeaning the intellectual capacity of other
persons by calling them morons, idiots, or imbeciles. What are presently insults
were once legitimate categories for delineating levels of mental retardation.
Likewise even the term retardation has come to have a pejorative meaning, as in
the slang term “You’re a RE-tard.”
DSM requires three conditions for the diagnosis of mental retardation. First,
the individual must have significantly subaverage intellectual functioning: (an IQ
Why People Become Patients 117
of approximately 70 or below). This score should be derived from an individually
administered IQ test rather than a group testing. The second requirement for this
diagnosis is far vaguer. It requires that the individual have concurrent deficits or
impairments in present adaptive functioning (the person’s effectiveness in meeting the standards expected for his or her age by his or her cultural group) in at
least two of the following areas: communication, self-care, home living, social/
interpersonal skills, use of community resources, self-direction, functional academic skills, work, leisure, health, and safety. There are many other disorders
that might also lead to or cause impairment in adaptive function. The final factor
is that the origin of the problem was during the developmental period, prior to
age 18. The following groupings are ranges, rather than a single number, because
each individual cannot be assigned a single descriptive number.
The following ranges are based on the degree of severity reflecting the assessed level of intellectual impairment:
317 Mild Mental Retardation: IQ level from 50–55 to approximately 70
318.0 Moderate Mental Retardation: IQ level 35–40 to 50–55
318.1 Severe Mental Retardation: IQ level 20–25 to 35–40
318.2 Profound Mental Retardation: IQ level below 20 or 25
319 Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified: when there is strong
presumption of Mental Retardation but the person’s intelligence is
difficult or untestable by standard testing instruments.
Mental retardation is coded on Axis II.
Learning Disorders
A common problem seen in consultation with children and adolescence has to
do with their performance in their “work”—the acquisition of basic academic
skills. These problems include reading disorders, mathematics disorders, disorders of written expression, developmental coordination disorder, expressive language disorder, mixed receptive language disorder, and phonological disorder.
In all cases, the individual’s performance is measured by individually
administered standardized tests. The individual’s performance on standard measures is found to be substantially below the age or grade level expected, given the
child’s chronological age, measured intelligence, and age-appropriate education.
The previously noted problems significantly (and this is a key word) interfere with the person’s academic achievement, the individual’s activities of daily
living that require the particular skills being evaluated, or the individual’s social interactions. Finally, if there is a sensory deficit, the difficulties that the individual has are in excess of those usually associated with the deficit. If a child
is deaf, speech problems may have resulted from the lack or limiting of auditory
input. The disorder indicates that the person has problems above and beyond
those expected of a deaf (or blind) child.
Pervasive Developmental Disorders
Pervasive developmental disorders (PDD) are well named. The problems that are
capsular in this group are all-encompassing. They reach in and affect every part
of the individual’s life. Second, they represent a major difference in functioning
118 Introduction
from their age-level companions. The deficits of many children with PDD are obvious early in the individual’s development. Probably the best known of the pervasive developmental disorders is autism. It is useful to think of an autistic
spectrum. We can find children at every level from the most severe forms to very
mild forms that might go unnoticed.
The social interactions of the autistic individual are identified by some potential behaviors. There is often a marked impairment in the use of multiple
nonverbal behaviors such as making and maintaining appropriate eye contact,
appropriate facial expression, and body postures. There may also be a failure or
great difficulty in developing peer relationships appropriate to the individual’s
age or developmental level. For example a 10-year-old child is most comfortable and chooses to play with 5-year-old children when there are other children available who would be more appropriate.
Typically, children share things that they enjoy with significant others.
This might involve bringing drawings home from school or nursery school, joining with family members in fun activities, or pointing out objects of interest
(“Mommy, look at the horse”). The autistic child seems to lack the motivation
or skill to spontaneously share enjoyment, interests, or their achievements
with other people. Finally, there is a lack of social or emotional reciprocity.
There are also qualitative impairments in communication such as a delay
in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language. The child who lacks
language but attempts to convey ideas, feelings, or wants through alternative
modes of communication such as gesture or mime would not be considered as
having the same type of communication impairment. In individuals with adequate speech, there is a marked impairment in the individual’s ability or motivation to initiate or sustain a conversation with other people. Their communication
often includes the stereotyped and repetitive use of words, terms, phrases, or
ideas. The individual may develop an idiosyncratic language that may differ minimally or markedly from the language use of the family or of the society.
The autistic individual typically lacks the varied, spontaneous makebelieve play or social imitative play appropriate to the individual’s developmental level. Instead, their behavior, interests, and activities are restricted,
repetitive, and stereotyped. Their interest in a subject may reflect an unusual
level of preoccupation, intensity, or focus. The individual shows a behavioral
pattern that seems to be inflexible, and adheres to specific, nonfunctional routines or rituals. The diagnostic sign that is most noticeable to the observer is the
autistic individual’s stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms such as
hand or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body movement. The
clinician must be careful here, because other disorders may show somewhat
similar behaviors; for example, visually challenged children often “finger-flic”
by waving their fingers in front of their eyes. This causes alterations in light
and shadow and is visually stimulating.
Some autistic children show incredible aptitude at a skill that is far and
away above “normal.” They might be able to multiply a 10-digit number by another 10-digit number at the speed of an electronic calculator. Other autistic savants (learned persons) can hear a piece of music and then play it from
memory. These same individuals may be unable to learn to read music, but they
have a “golden ear.”
Why People Become Patients 119
Finally, there may be an intense and pervasive interest with the parts of
objects as opposed to the whole, such as interest in taking objects apart without
the apparent curiosity of what makes the object work. They may then play with
a wheel, gear, or part.
The identification of autism involves delays or abnormal functioning in at
least one of the following areas, with onset prior to age 3 years: (a) social interaction, (b) language as used in social communication, or (c) symbolic or imaginative play.
Asperger’s Disorder
Asperger’s Disorder can be thought of as the highest functioning manifestation within the autistic spectrum. There are many of the same qualities, behaviors, and signs noted earlier. The differences may be that the individual is
“almost” normal. Their awareness of social cues, attention to interactive details, or verbalizations may be close to normal, but just miss the mark. These
individuals may be labeled as “eccentric,” “weird,” or “a little off.” They may
do very well in academic areas because of the high level of structure involved
and required. The largest difficulty may be in their lack of attention to social
cues. They seem to miss them. They might be prone to enter a conversation
by interrupting and overlooking the appropriate social niceties. They may
have difficulty in relationships because of their lack of attention (though not
awareness) of appropriate social behavior. The disturbance causes clinically
significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
Unlike the description of autism, there is no clinically significant general
delay in language (e.g., single words are used by age 2 years, communicative
phrases by age 3 years), and there is no clinically significant delay in cognitive
development or development of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior (other than in social interaction), and curiosity about the environment
in childhood.
In many settings, these individuals may be very successful. They focus on
things rather than people, so that they may be the computer geek or math nerdwho succeeds in structured, task-oriented settings, but has significant problems
in interpersonal circumstances. Their nonattention or recognition of environmental or social cues may cause them difficulty.
Attention-Deficit and Disruptive Behavior
Another disorder that is commonly diagnosed in children is Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Once again, the pattern is maladaptive and inconsistent with the child’s developmental level. There are two equally problematic components, the lack of attention and the high level of activity. These
children often fail to give close attention to the details of a game, an academic
requirement, or a social interaction. They often make what appear to be careless mistakes in schoolwork, work, or other activities even after they have been
warned to be careful. They may be highly motivated to be careful, but their attention seems to wander. This is not related only to school activities; the child
may have difficulty sustaining attention in many tasks (doing chores at home)
or in play activities.
120 Introduction
The child may not seem to listen, even when spoken to directly. The child
(or adult) often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace. This occurs even though the individual is motivated to comply, wants to do well, and appears to understand
the instructions or requirements.
Because of the attentional deficits, these children have difficulty organizing tasks and activities. They may even appear confused and disorganized and
will conspire to avoid tasks that require sustained mental focus and effort.
Nothing is more frustrating for AD/HD individuals and for their families than
the disorganization that has the child losing things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., toys, school assignments, pencils, books, or tools). Further, the attention problem is both caused by and typical of their ease of distraction by both
external and internal stimuli.
Hyperactivity
Hyperactive children often fidget with their hands or feet or may be seen
squirming in their seat. It is important to remember age-appropriate fidgeting.
It is difficult for a child to always behave in every situation. When asked to
stand in line and wait, the hyperactive child may be fidgeting and squirming in
place. Other times, these children may leave their seat in a classroom, at the
dinner table, at the movies, or in other situations in which remaining seated is
the expected (or demanded) behavior. When other children are actively moving
about, running, or climbing, the level of activity of the hyperactive child is excessive and may be inappropriate. When hyperactivity is seen in adolescents or
adults, it may have all the previously noted actions, but also may include subjective feelings of restlessness.
When hyperactive children are expected to spend time restfully and quietly, they have great difficulty and act as if “driven by a motor.” In classroom
settings or at home, these children often talk excessively, impulsively, or compulsively. They have difficulty waiting their turn while other children (or siblings) are awaiting a turn. The hyperactive child often blurts out answers
before the teacher’s or parent’s questions have been fully asked. They will interrupt or intrude on the conversations or activities of others. The frequent
statement is, “but Mom . . .” A key diagnostic factor is that there must be clear
evidence of clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning that does not occur exclusively during the course of some
other disorder such as a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or
other Psychotic Disorder and are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., Mood Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, Dissociative Disorder, or a Personality Disorder).
Conduct Disorder
Conduct disorder involves a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in
which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or
rules are violated. These can include physical, verbal, or emotional aggression
to people (children and adults) or to animals. This aggressive behavior can be
cruel, bullying, threatening or intimidating behavior. These children are prone
Why People Become Patients 121
to initiate physical fights or cause physical damage to others. They may use
their hands but may also use a weapon such as a bat, brick, broken bottle, rock,
knife, or gun. They may also be physically cruel to animals and injure, torture,
or kill them. They may force another child into sexual activity.
They seem to have no compunction about mugging, purse snatching, and extortion, armed robbery, selling contraband, or injuring another
person for profit. They may have stolen items of substantial value without confronting a victim (e.g., shoplifting, breaking and entering, forgery,
auto theft).
They demonstrate a lack of respect for the property of others and seem to
have little hesitation in deliberately destroying the property of others, or of
public buildings (schools, churches, governmental buildings). The destructive
behaviors might include fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage, vandalism, or explosives. They may be more circumspect in deceitfulness
as well. They often lie to obtain goods or favors or when confronted by their actions, to avoid obligations, consequences, or punishment.
These children often come into conflict with parental, school, or
legal authorities because of serious violations of rules. Beginning before age
13 years, they may violate curfew by staying out at night despite parental
prohibitions, or might have run away from home overnight at least twice
while living in parental or parental surrogate home. As a result of their
challenges to “the system,” they may be truant from school. Overall, their behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
When the problems are mild, there are few if any conduct problems in excess of those required for the diagnosis, and the conduct problems cause only
minor harm to others. A moderate disorder reflects a greater number of conduct
problems and the effect on others would be between “mild” and “severe.” Finally, a severe conduct disorder would involve any conduct problems in excess
of those required to make the diagnosis and their conduct problems would cause
considerable harm to others.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
When a child has been diagnosed as having an Oppositional Defiant Disorder, it
is often a case of parents, teachers, clergy, or coaches being unable to
deal/cope/handle the child. These children display a pattern of negativistic,
hostile, and defiant behavior that has been recognizable for at least 6 months,
during which there are several markers including often losing his or her temper, arguing with adults over small details and issues that do not warrant the
time or energy for the child to object or argue; when asked to follow rules or requests, the child shows active defiance or refusal to comply. The key idea is that
the refusal is active as opposed to a more passive refusal. These children often
seem to go out of their way to do things that deliberately annoy people. When
called to task for misdeeds or mistakes, they find scapegoats or simply blame
others for their mistakes or misbehavior. Hypersensitivity causes this child to be
easily annoyed by others, which results in the child acting in a resentful, spiteful, or vindictive manner.
122 Introduction
What has been described could easily describe most normal adolescents.
As noted, the key to diagnosing problematic behavior is that the behavior is
more frequent or more maladaptive than would be typically observed in individuals of a comparable age, gender, social setting, and developmental level.
The identified behavior causes the child clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Delirium, Dementia, Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
Imagine the following: As you are reading this book the words suddenly start to
run across the page, the content is confusing, you keep losing your place, and
you forget the courses that you are taking and the name of your best friend.
Your first response may be to self-instruct yourself to get more sleep. But what
if these are not the symptoms of sleep deprivation, an occupational hazard of
being a student? What if something is wrong with your brain?
The problems discussed in this section are disorders with psychological
impact that are caused by temporary or permanent changes to the structure,
functioning, and metabolism of the brain. The problems caused by this type of
disorder range from slow deterioration of mental abilities such as judgment,
memory, concentration, abstract thinking, impulse control, intellectual abilities, social functioning, and occupational functioning to a rapid and catastrophic loss. The differences between these two types of presentation are
significant. Diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease are well known to cause memory lapses that may range from minor (misplacing one’s glasses) to potentially
life-threatening (leaving a pot on the stove and forgetting it, causing a fire).
These disorders come under the broad heading of dementia.
Part of the loss is not just to the individual who may be aware of the difficulty in remembering things, but also to their family and friends. They may,
when the deterioration is serious, forget the names of their children, spouses,
and friends. Hilda, married to Harry for 55 years, was placed in a care facility
when Harry could no longer care for her at home. He visited her every day,
and sat with her for hours, looking at pictures of their children and grandchildren. By her comments, it was clear that to her these were just nice pictures
of nice children. She did not know their names, or her relationship to them.
When children and grandchildren visited, it was, once again, a visit by nice
people. At one point, when Harry entered her room, Hilda began screaming
that a strange man was there and for someone to get him away from her. She
could be calmed, but Harry was inconsolable. He had truly lost his wife.
She lived and breathed, but was not available in any way for him. He grieved
her loss.
When there are losses of judgment, these individuals may lose the polish
and control that, over the years, characterized them. The prim and proper individual may now use coarse language, make obscene statements and gestures,
make sexual advances to strangers, or make inappropriate racial, ethnic, or gender statements.
There may also be a disturbance of consciousness (reduced clarity of
awareness of their environment) with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift
attention. In addition to memory deficits, there may be disorientation, lan-
Why People Become Patients 123
guage disturbance, or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not
better accounted for by another disorder such as a preexisting psychotic process. The brain deterioration may cause fluctuation through the day, so that at
one time the individual is clear and calm, and at another time, for no apparent
reason, the individual’s behavior is far worse.
A thorough physical examination with laboratory work is important because some of these same symptoms may be the sequelae or physiological consequences of a general medical condition, toxic reactions to drugs, food allergies, or
medication overdose.
There can also be a rather rapid onset dementia that is caused by a stroke.
This is caused by a reduction or loss of oxygen to the brain (which as you know,
is a major consumer of oxygen). This loss of oxygen can cause the damage or
even loss of language, loss of sensation, deterioration or loss of motor skills
(gross and fine), and coordination problems. If the loss of oxygen is small and
confined to a specific area, the loss may be minimal and the skills or abilities
may return. Cognitive rehabilitation, physical therapy, and psychotherapy may
all be used to assist individuals in their recovery. In other, more serious circumstances, the losses may be permanent.
Another brain-related problem is delirium. This is a state of severe mental
confusion. The delirium may come on quite suddenly and may start with restlessness, a lack of coherence in thought and speech, a lack of clarity in speech
(words may be mispronounced or slurred), and the individual may not be oriented to time, place, or person. There may also be perceptual disturbances and
hallucinations. Many factors must be considered in treating individuals with
brain-related disorders.
Substance-Related Disorders
It is Saturday night, and a group of students are setting out to have a good time.
They are ready to PARTY! A likely part of that good time will involve the use of
one or several intoxicants. These may be taken very quickly, or savored over a
longer period. The substances may be legal (nicotine or caffeine), illegal (e.g.,
cocaine, marijuana, heroin, or methamphetamine), the substance may be illegal at one age but legal at an older age (e.g., alcohol). The substance may be
legal for one use and then misused to achieve a “high” (e.g., inhalants, gasoline,
cooking spray). The substances may be taken by choice, or ingested unknowingly as in so-called date-rape drugs.
This is not the forum for us to argue the legality, acceptability, or prevalence of substance use or the rules governing substance use and misuse. Students will have their own ideas of substance use relative to the needed quantity
to have the desired effect (feeling good, getting high), availability, cost, and legality. A case might be made that despite the fact that every pack of cigarettes
carries on it a warning from the Surgeon General regarding the health risks of
smoking, people continue to smoke. About the only thing that these individuals stop is reading their cigarette packs.
Several terms have come to the fore, and others recede based on acceptability and political correctness of the term. Drug abuse has been replaced
by drug misuse. The problems come when the choices to use or misuse various
124 Introduction
intoxicants are no longer easily made, but related to psychological or physiological factors.
Substance Dependence
Dependence is a maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by three (or more) of the following, occurring at any time within a 12-month period.
1. There is tolerance as defined by either a need for markedly increased amounts
of the substance to achieve intoxication or desired effect, or markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the substance.
2. There is withdrawal, as manifested by either the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for that particular substance inasmuch as withdrawal for some substances
is far more difficult or dangerous than withdrawal from other substances, or the
same (or a closely related) substance is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal
symptoms.
3. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than the
individual had intended.
4. There is a persistent desire but unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use of
the particular substance. In this regard, the individual “means well,” but has
been unsuccessful at meeting personal goals of cutting back.
5. There is a great deal of time, energy, and effort, and possibly personal risk spent
in activities necessary to obtain the substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or
driving long distances), using the substance (e.g., chain-smoking), recover from
the effects of the substance use, going into unsafe areas to obtain the substance,
or risking legal problems if arrested.
6. The substance use supersedes social, occupational, or recreational activities. Time
with family, friends, studying is given up or reduced because of substance use.
7. The substance use is continued despite the individual’s knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have
been caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g., current cocaine use) despite
recognition of cocaine-induced depression, or continued drinking despite recognition that an ulcer was made worse by alcohol consumption, continued smoking despite a diagnosis of respiratory distress.
Criteria for Substance Abuse
Although abuse and dependence have many similar characteristics, there are
differences in terms of the degree of severity, involvement, and maladaptive
behavior in the person’s life. Dependence requires three or more criteria; abuse
requires only one. Substance abuse involves a maladaptive pattern of substance
use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by one
(or more) of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. recurrent substance use resulting in a failure (not just a limitation) to fulfill
major role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences or poor
work performance related to substance use; substance-related absences, suspen-


sions, or expulsions from school; neglect of children, or lack of caring for one’s
household);
2. recurrent substance use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by substance
use);
3. recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g., arrests for substance-related
possession, sales, or disorderly conduct resulting from the substance use);
4. continued substance use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the substance (e.g., arguments with one’s spouse about consequences of intoxication, physical fights,
loss of friends, expulsion from clubs or other social groups).
Finally, the symptoms have never met the criteria for Substance Dependence for this particular class of substance (DSM-IV-TR, p. 191).
Criteria for Substance Intoxication
Have you ever been the designated driver at a party? It is your job to get everyone home safely because these other individuals are intoxicated. Intoxication is
defined as the development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome due to
recent ingestion of (or exposure to) a substance. Obviously, different substances may produce similar or identical reactions and syndromes. It may not
be clear without a laboratory drug screen just what drugs are “on board” that
are creating the observable behaviors.
The individual will likely manifest clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes due to the effect of the substance on the central nervous system (e.g., belligerence, mood lability, cognitive impairment,
impaired judgment, impaired social, coordination difficulty, impulse control
problems, or occupational functioning) that develop during or shortly after use
of the substance. It is essential to have a medical evaluation because certain
neurological issues noted earlier in this chapter (e.g., stroke) can cause similar
reactions and behaviors. Thus it is important to determine that the symptoms
are not due to a general medical condition or are not better accounted for by
another mental disorder. Some substances that are misused are prescription
medications. Benzodiazepines, pain medications, sedatives, or other drugs with
codeine for coughs are also drugs of abuse. These drugs may be used for a long
period and may become habit forming.
A final statement relates to polysubstance abuse and dependence. Individuals involved in polysubstance abuse will ingest, smoke, drink, inhale, or inject
any substance that they believe will get them high.
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
An old joke states, “Neurotics spend their lives building castles in the sky. The
psychotic moves in.” Images of homeless men and women living on the street,
apparently deep in conversation with others, whom only they can see, are
common. Freud called dreams the normal person’s psychosis. In our dreams,
we can fly, talk to people that we have never met, perform acts that we would
126 Introduction
never attempt, or go to places that we have never been. Dreams may be so real
that people who have a sad dream may awaken with their face wet from tears.
Your sleeping partner elbows you during the night to stop your loud laughing
at what must have been a very funny joke or experience. Psychosis, however, is
far more serious. Especially in schizophrenia, the patient can have positive
symptoms (referring to behavioral excesses). They have observable and noticeable behaviors that are typical, pervasive, and frequent.
Psychosis may include delusions (ideas and beliefs that are contrary to reality). These distorted ideas are maintained despite any and all contradictory evidence—this can be summarized as “Just because I am paranoid doesn’t mean
people are not following me.” Probably the most common delusions are those
of persecution. The belief is that “people” are out to harm them. These may be
from the government, outer space, or a secret society that only they know
about. Often these delusions are highly detailed, use facts from the news to
support their ideas, typically involve logical leaps that are hard to follow, but
make sense to the individual.
There may also be hallucinations. These involve perceptions that occur
without adequate sensory input. The individual will smell, see, hear, or feel
things that others near them do not perceive. The most frequent type of hallucination is auditory. Visual and olfactory hallucinations are far less frequent.
When the individual “hears” the voices, they often respond in conversation or
respond behaviorally through action by injuring or damaging themselves or
others. The source of the voice may range from George Washington to God.
They often have disorganized speech with frequent derailment or incoherence. Ideas flow at a rapid rate and while the listener may detect themes and
ideas in the words, they often do not make any sense. One word/idea leads to
another with alliteration or a rhyme as the only apparent connection. The Liberty Bell may, in the next sentence become the Statue of Liberty. A single idea
may trigger multiple tracks for the individual.
Similarly, their dress, actions, posture may all be affected. They might fashion a hat from aluminum foil to stop damaging rays from going into their brain.
There are also negative symptoms that are behavioral deficits. These include affective flattening, wherein these individuals appear to be without emotion. No matter what the external stimuli, they evidence no external emotional
reaction, although their internal emotions may be at a high pitch. With low
levels of energy, they may sit and stare for hours at a time and not attend to
meals, their personal hygiene, or their dress. This is termed avolition. They may
also show alogia, which involves both impoverished production and content of
speech. The person may show very few words, monosyllabic responses, or
many words without any real content.
The schizophrenic individual typically experiences social and occupational dysfunction. Major areas of functioning such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care are markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset of
the disorder. Onset is usually late adolescence or early adulthood. When the
onset is in childhood or adolescence, which is far rarer, there is more severe impairment of interpersonal, academic, or occupational achievement.
Many of the positive and negative symptoms listed could also be typical of
substance use. It is essential that the disturbance is not due to the direct physi-
Why People Become Patients 127
ological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general
medical condition.
If there is a history of Autistic Disorder or another Pervasive Developmental Disorder, the additional diagnosis of Schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations are also present for at least a month (or less if
successfully treated). The classification of a longitudinal course (can be applied
only after at least 1 year has elapsed since the initial onset of active-phase
symptoms).
To understand the complex thinking of the individual diagnosed with the
Paranoid Type of schizophrenia, think of Tolkien’s The Hobbit or Lord of the Rings
(1986). The invention of racial groups, a genealogy, a geography, and social and
political systems, displays the creativity, originality, imagination, and inspiration of a great writer. If we see the constructions of the paranoid schizophrenic
as akin to this, we can start to understand why the delusions are so compelling
for the individual.
The Catatonic Type of schizophrenia is characterized by alternating between episodes of extreme agitation and what has been termed “waxy flexibility.” That is, patients can be placed in a particular position, or have their limbs
placed in a particular way and will remain in that position. This variant is not
typically seen because the use of psychotropic medication has increased.
Schizoaffective Disorder
As the name implies, this disorder is a mix of schizophrenia and an affective
disorder. The individual will have hallucinations and delusions that are characteristic of a psychotic process, and symptoms of a mood disturbance during the
same time.
Depressive Disorders
Depression has been called “the common cold of emotional disorders.” It
would be rare to find an individual who has never experienced some variant of
depression from being “down,” “blue,” or having the “blahs.” When the depressed feelings are ongoing, the individual may meet the criteria for some
depressive disorder. It may be a major depressive disorder with only a single episode, and the experience may be mild, moderate, severe without psychotic features, or severe with psychotic features.
Individuals who have a number of depressed episodes may be diagnosed
as having major depressive disorder, recurrent. This implies that the depression
returns on some periodic basis and that there have been two or more major depressive episodes. To be considered separate episodes, there must be the presence an interval of at least 2 consecutive months in which criteria are not met
for a Major Depressive Episode.
The symptoms of depression include being depressed for most of the day
every day, a diminished interest or pleasure in activities nearly every day, significant weight loss or gain when not trying to lose or gain weight, problems with
sleep, either difficulty sleeping or problems in waking, slowed or increased
motor activity, fatigue or loss of energy, feelings of worthlessness, problems in
128 Introduction
concentration, or decision making, and suicidal thinking or recurrent thoughts
of death.
Dysthymic Disorder
Many children are familiar with the characters in A. A. Milne’s Winnie-the-Pooh.
Eeyore, the donkey, is likely a dysthymic individual. For Eeyore, nothing is ever
good, much less great. For Eeyore, everything is “O . . . kay.” Dysthymia involves a depressed mood for “most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated either by subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.”
Another common variant of an affective disorder is Bipolar Disorder, formerly known as manic depression. The manifestation of Bipolar Disorder is
that the individual cycles through being depressed and being manic. This includes a range of symptoms that involve a grandiose view of self, decreased
need for sleep where the individual may not sleep for days, or sleep only two
hours per night, speech that is pressured so that the individual speaks very
quickly as if the words are being forced out under some strain, becoming easily
distracted, a sensation or experience of thought racing at high speed, and the
possibility of painful or impulsive behavior such as gambling, spending, or
promiscuous activities.
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety is a common and important part of human functioning. It manifests itself as an emotion, a physiological state, through behaviors, and as a set of cognitions. The basic idea underlying all anxiety is that there is danger in the world
(which is true), but anxious individuals have the concomitant belief that they
are unsuited or unskilled to effectively cope with the danger.
The various anxiety disorders need to be viewed as an anxiety spectrum,
so that typically an individual has many pieces of the several anxiety disorders.
The various types of anxiety depend on where the individual believes the danger will come from. In Generalized Anxiety Disorder, the danger is everywhere,
and they must be ready to respond with their typical safety behavior of avoidance. In Phobia, the danger comes from a discrete object or situation. In Social
Anxiety, the potential for danger in social situations is foremost. For ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder, the danger can be kept at a safe distance by performing
specific behaviors. In Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, the danger is deeply set
within a network of associations and memories that invade both waking and
sleeping experience, triggering fear, avoidance, and numbing of affect.
In Simple Phobia or Social Phobia, the person may have panic attacks, but
these occur only in the presence of specific phobic stimuli. The diagnosis of
Panic Disorder is made only when attacks are unexpected and do not occur immediately before or during exposure to a specific situation that almost always
causes anxiety. Individuals with Panic Disorder may believe that they are going
to die unless they swiftly and immediately leave whatever they are doing (e.g.,
driving, shopping).
The distinction between Panic Disorder with and without Agoraphobia
can be difficult if the agoraphobic avoidance is mild. When asked if they avoid
Why People Become Patients 129
many situations, clients with panic attacks may answer no, leading one to conclude that they have Panic Disorder without Agoraphobia. However, patterns of
avoidance may be subtle or may have continued for so long that the client does
not recognize the avoidance.
Social Phobia is a fear of exposure to the scrutiny of others, particularly
the fear of embarrassment or humiliation due to one’s actions while others are
watching. Although seemingly straightforward, the diagnosis of Social Phobia
can be complex. Social anxiety in and of itself is not sufficient to warrant the
diagnosis of Social Phobia. There must be a persistent fear of one or more situations in which the person is exposed to possible scrutiny by others and fears
that he or she may act in a way that will be humiliating or embarrassing. Social
Phobias often include fear that one’s anxiety will be noticed by others. Thus, a
social phobic may be unwilling to write in the view of others for fear that his or
her hand will tremble or may avoid social situations for fear of perspiring excessively because of nervousness.
A Simple Phobia is a persistent fear of a specific object or situation and is
usually circumscribed. Fears of specific stimuli such as heights, insects, snakes,
and so on are common but would be considered to be Simple Phobias if the fear
and/or avoidance resulted in significant impairment or distress. Simple phobias
range from the commonplace, such as fear of flying, to the idiosyncratic, such
as fear of the wind.
Many clients who report a fear of germs or dirt have developed elaborate
cleaning or hand-washing rituals. Clients may be so used to their extensive
strategies for preventing harm that they no longer view them as rituals and may
not think to mention them. Even if fears and phobias exist, a person who also
has significant obsessions or compulsions would be diagnosed as having an Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.
In Generalized Anxiety Disorder, the term generalized leads many to mistakenly assume that the anxiety is continuous, pervasive, and “free-floating.”
Careful assessment of individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder makes it
clear that there are definite variations in the presence and intensity of anxiety,
depending on the situation and cognitions of the client at the time.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) has received much attention in recent years due to the high incidence of PTSD among combat veterans. However,
PTSD can occur following any extraordinary traumatic event such as a natural
disaster, a major accident, or victimization. Clinically, it is valuable to distinguish between PTSD resulting from a single traumatic event and PTSD resulting
from recurrent trauma. Persons with PTSD stemming from recurrent trauma
appear to be much more difficult to treat effectively.
For most anxiety disorders, there is some combination of the following experiences at varying levels of intensity:
• palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate
• sweating
• trembling or shaking
• sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
• feeling of choking
130 Introduction
• chest pain or discomfort
• nausea or abdominal distress
• feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint
• derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from
oneself)
• fear of losing control or going crazy
• fear of dying
• paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
• chills or hot flushes
• difficulty concentrating
• hypervigilance
• exaggerated startle response
Somatoform Disorders
Somatoform disorders represent identifiable physical symptoms that are not
fully explained by the individual’s general medical condition or by the direct effects of some substance. The physical symptoms are not something that the individual causes or attempts to fake. Just about any bodily system can be
affected by the disorder. There are several types of disorder.
In Somatization Disorder, there is a history of many physical complaints
beginning before age 30 years that occur over a period of several years and result in treatment being sought or in significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. Each of the following criteria
must have been met, with individual symptoms occurring at any time during
the course of the disturbance;
• four pain symptoms: a history of pain related to at least four different sites or
functions (e.g., head, abdomen, back, joints, extremities, chest, rectum, during
menstruation, during sexual intercourse, or during urination)
• two gastrointestinal symptoms: a history of at least two gastrointestinal
symptoms other than pain (e.g., nausea, bloating, vomiting other than during
pregnancy, diarrhea, or intolerance of several different foods)
• one sexual symptom: a history of at least one sexual or reproductive symptom other than pain (e.g., sexual indifference, erectile or ejaculatory dysfunction, irregular menses, excessive menstrual bleeding, vomiting throughout
pregnancy)
• one pseudoneurological symptom: a history of at least one symptom or
deficit suggesting a neurological condition not limited to pain (conversion
symptoms such as impaired coordination or balance, paralysis or localized
weakness, difficulty swallowing or lump in throat, aphonia, urinary retention, hallucinations, loss of touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness,
deafness, seizures; dissociative symptoms such as amnesia; or loss of consciousness other than fainting)
Why People Become Patients 131
The symptoms are not intentionally produced or feigned (as in Factitious
Disorder or Malingering; DSM-IV-TR, p. 449).
Conversion Disorder can occur with a motor symptom or deficit/with
sensory symptom or a deficit/with seizures or convulsions.
Pain Disorders can be associated with psychological factors or associated
with both psychological factors and a general medical condition. This condition
might be acute or chronic.
Hypochondriasis, also termed health anxiety, involves a fear of the danger
of physical illness. The hypochondriac can interpret aches, pains, bumps, and
lumps as diseases and illnesses that defy medical evaluation. Despite many and
frequent medical visits, hypochondriacs cannot accept that the illnesses are
psychogenic rather than the result of some flaw or fault in their bodily functioning. They will spend time and money on shopping for the medical professional who can and will diagnose them as having a medical problem. Often
preoccupied with their concerns about illness, hypochondriacs will have difficulty maintaining relationships and family connections. While this illness preoccupation does not reach the level of a delusion, there is a quality of reality
being challenged in the constant search for elusive symptoms.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder is related to hypochondria in that these individuals believe that their body is defective and that their appearance needs to
be altered. It can be the motive for numerous plastic surgeries, alterations, or
enhancements. This does mean that every surgery is excessive. It is the ongoing
dissatisfaction that leads to multiple surgeries.
Factitious Disorders do not involve an intentional production or feigning
of physical or psychological signs or symptoms. There is an unconscious or
naive motivation of the individual to assume the sick role. Individuals may
even take drugs or medications to create the very symptoms for which they
seek treatment. Unlike malingering, they do not do this with a goal such as economic gain or for avoiding legal responsibility. Factitious disorders can be seen
with predominantly psychological signs and symptoms.
In malingering, the individual creates the disorder for some financial gain
or the avoidance of responsibility. Both disorders show what appears to be a
medical disorder. The malingering patient may not be as cooperative with a
medical team nor comply with a prescribed medication regiment, there may be
a marked discrepancy between the individual’s claimed difficulty and the findings on objective medical tests, and most important, there is some outside gain
or reward for maintaining the purported medical disorder.
Dissociative Disorders
The category of Dissociative Disorders includes Dissociative Amnesia, Dissociative Fugue, Dissociative Identity Disorder, and Depersonalization Disorder.
The common element to these disorders is “a disruption in the usually integrated functions of consciousness, memory, identity, or perception of the environment. The disturbance may be sudden or gradual, transient or chronic.”
(DSM-IV-TR, 2000, p. 477). Dissociative Amnesia involves difficulty or even
the inability to recall events or circumstances that were traumatic. Although
132 Introduction
patients may have vague and inaccurate memories, they can, over time, recover the lost data.
Dissociative Fugue is the stuff of books, stories, and movies. In a fugue
state, the individual may travel at a distance from their home, be unable to remember elements of the trip, and, in the course of the trip have conversations
with another person. In severe cases, the individual may assume a new identity,
not remembering his or her former identity.
Dissociative Identity Disorder can also present in a dramatic manner with
the individual having two or more distinct identities. Books and films such as
The Three Faces of Eve (Thigpen & Cleckley, 1957), or Sybil (Schreiber, 1977)
show examples of this disorder. The individual may have “alters” who are of
different ages than the patient, of different gender, or a different race or ethnicity. The debate regarding the apparent increase of this disorder is whether
we are becoming better able to identify such individuals or whether we are
over-diagnosing the disorder.
Depersonalization Disorder involves a persistent or recurrent experience
of feeling detached from, and as if one is an outside observer of, one’s mental
processes or body (e.g., feeling as if one is in a dream). During the depersonalization experience, reality testing remains intact while individuals may report
being able to “watch themselves as if in a movie.” This has also been labeled
spectatoring.
Sexual Disorders, Paraphilias, and Gender Identity Disorders
These disorders constitute a large and troubling area for the affected individual
and potentially for society.
Sexual Dysfunctions can occur in every phase of the sexual arousal cycle.
This includes disturbances in desire, excitement, orgasm, or resolution. The
dysfunction can be a lifelong type or acquired type, a generalized type or a situational type. Finally, the disorder might be due to psychological factors, medical/physical factors, substance use, or a combination of them.
Sexual dysfunctions include Sexual Desire Disorders such as Hypoactive
Sexual Desire Disorder where there is a lack of sexual desire and an absence of
sexual fantasy. The disorder may be global and include all forms of sexual expression. These individuals may engage in sexual activity with a low frequency
to satisfy a partner, but would not likely initiate sexual contact or expression.
If, however, this does not cause difficulty for the individual, it may not be perceived as a problem (e.g., two partners, both of whom have a hypoactive sexual desire).
In Sexual Aversion Disorder, there is a distaste, repugnance, and avoidance of sexual contact with a partner. At an extreme, it could also include aversions to kissing, touching, or fondling. To be considered a disorder, the aversion
must cause significant distress and interpersonal difficulty for the individual.
Sexual Arousal Disorders for both men and women involve the inability
to attain and then maintain the physiological arousal. For a woman, this includes vasocongestion in the pelvis, vaginal lubrication and expansion, and
swelling of the external genitalia. For the male, it involves the ability to maintain until completion an adequate erection. (It should be noted that what is
Why People Become Patients 133
“adequate” is a debatable point. An individual male might view his erection is
not adequate, yet it allows for genital-genital sex without difficulty.) Another
point to consider is that the use of medications such as Viagra, Levitra, and
Cialis can treat erectile dysfunction rather easily. In this case, the disorder is
said to be in remission. Another consideration is that erectile dysfunction could
be a sign of atherosclerosis and may signal a need for a medical evaluation.
Orgasmic Disorders are difficult to assess. They may relate to age, health,
sexual experience, and sexual stimulation. The disorder may manifest as delay
in, or absence of an orgasm as part of the sexual activity.
Premature Ejaculation, like other sexual disorders, is difficult to identify.
How much time should elapse before the male reaches orgasm? Partner estimates often vary widely. Key ingredients involve whether the ejaculation occurs sooner than the individual or partner desires it. It may relate to factors
during the excitement phase, novelty of the experience, sexual experience of
the individual, and recency or frequency of sexual activity.
Sexual Pain Disorders such as Dyspareunia that is not due to a medical
condition can occur in both males and females and involves pain before, during, and after intercourse.
Vaginismus that is not due to medical condition involves a persistent and
recurrent involuntary contraction of the perineal muscles surrounding the
outer third of the vagina. This will cause pain and difficulty in intercourse or in
inserting a tampon.
Finally, sexual dysfunction can be related to the use of a substance, especially when intoxication is involved.
Paraphilias span a spectrum of behavior; Exhibitionism (the exposure of
genitals), Fetishism (the sexual arousal involves nonhuman objects, e.g., shoes,
underwear), Frotteurism (rubbing against or touching a nonconsenting person), and Pedophilia (a sexual focus on children). The definition of child in one
state may differ in another, but the general rule is that pedophilia involves prepubertal children. Paraphilia also includes Sexual Masochism (receiving humiliation and pain), Sexual Sadism (inflicting humiliation and pain on another),
Transvestic Fetishism (cross-dressing); (this is also debatable inasmuch as the
wearing of the clothes of another gender may be acceptable in specific circumstances), and Voyeurism (the observation of the sexual activity of another). The
common thread for the paraphilias is that the individual has recurrent and intense sexual fantasies, urges, and actions that may involve nonhuman objects,
the suffering and humiliation of another person, or sexual involvement with
children or nonconsenting adults. In many cases, paraphiliac actions are considered criminal acts and may result in arrest and prosecution.
Society has allowed expression for some paraphilias. Peep shows and
pornography allow the individual to observe others involved in sexual activity.
Transvestism may be acceptable in private or in certain places or venues in
many cities. A masochistic individual may seek humiliation and pay a great deal
of money for it. Pedophilia, however, is banned and severely prosecuted in
every state. In most cases, excepting those sexual behaviors that hurt or impact
on others, the behavior must cause distress to the individual.
Gender Identity Disorders must have two components. The first is that these
individuals must evidence a strong and persistent cross-gender identification to
134 Introduction
be (or to insist that they are) of the other gender. The second component is that
they are uncomfortable with their gender or believe that their gender is inappropriate. In many cases, sexual reassignment is done. This involves extensive assessment, medical evaluation, behavioral training, and social skills training to help
the individuals fit into their desired gender role.
Eating Disorders
Eating disorders include Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia, and Binge Eating Disorder.
Anorexia Nervosa involves a refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for one’s age and height (e.g., weight loss leading to maintenance of body weight less than 85% of that expected; or failure to make expected
weight gain during period of growth, leading to body weight less than 85% of
that expected). There is also an intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat,
even though the individual may be medically compromised because of being underweight. There is also a disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or
shape is experienced The individual uses body weight or shape to maintain a positive self-evaluation. Even when there is medical necessity to gain weight, the seriousness of the current low body weight may be vehemently denied.
In Bulimia Nervosa, the person has regularly engaged in binges of eating
and purges (self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). First, recurrent episodes of binge eating involve eating in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of food that is larger
than most people would eat during a similar period and under similar circumstances. Second, the individual experiences lack of control over eating during
the episode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how
much one is eating). The individual may then engage in self-induced vomiting;
misuse of laxatives, diuretics, enemas, or other medications; fasting; or excessive exercise, all to avoid weight gain. As with anorexia, the individual’s selfevaluation is influenced by perceived body shape and weight.
A third category of eating disorder is Binge Eating Disorder. The individual
eats large amounts of food in a concentrated period of time, but without purging,
enemas, or laxatives. This behavior may lead to extensive weight gain and obesity.
Primary Sleep Disorders (Dyssomnias)
These disorders include Primary Insomnia, Primary Hypersomnia, Narcolepsy,
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder, Nightmare Disorder, Sleep Terror Disorder, and Sleepwalking Disorder.
Dyssomnias involve a disturbance in the amount, quality, or timing of
sleep. In Primary Insomnia, there is a problem initiating or maintaining sleep.
There may be problems in falling asleep, middle-of-the-night waking, or waking up well before one needs to in the morning. In Primary Hypersomnia, the
individual experiences excessive sleepiness, prolonged sleep episodes, or daytime sleep episodes daily. The assumption is made that the Hypersomnia is not
reactive to studying late, an extreme party experience, or the use of substances.
The person with Narcolepsy experiences “irresistible attacks of refreshing
sleep” (DSM-IV-TR, p. 567). In the middle of a conversation, the individual may
Why People Become Patients 135
show an eye flutter, a head drop, and fall asleep. While the consequences are
limited when sitting in a chair at home, driving can become a lethal activity for
the individual and anyone else on the road.
Breathing-related sleep disorder involves the disruption of restful sleep
because of breathing difficulty, for example, sleep apnea which involves an obstruction of the airway. The most common complaints are from the individual
who reports sleepiness the next day, and from sleep partners who have to deal
with loud snoring, interruptions in breathing, and snorting.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder involves a disruption in the sleepwake cycle. It could be brought on by jet lag or changing shift work. The
individual experiences sleepiness until his or her body adjusts to the new
sleep-wake cycle.
Nightmare Disorder creates a situation wherein the individual has
episodes of waking from a deep sleep with detailed memories of frightening
dreams. Sleep Terror Disorder is similar in that it involves abrupt waking from
sleep, but without the detailed memory of a dream, only the autonomic arousal
experienced during fear and danger.
In the midst of a Sleepwalking Disorder experience, individuals will rise
from their bed, walk about, and even involve themselves in activity, for example, eating. They can be awakened with difficulty, and they do not, as the myth
has it, die if you wake them.
Impulse Control Disorders
Impulse-Control Disorders include Intermittent Explosive Disorder (discrete
episodes of assault or destruction of property that must be differentiated
from other antisocial behavior, manic behavior, or conduct disorder), Kleptomania (failure to resist impulsive stealing or taking of property that belongs to
someone else), Pyromania (setting fires to achieve gratification, pleasure, or
a relief of tension), Pathological Gambling (persistent and pathological gambling that causes personal and relationship distress), and Trichotillomania
(pulling out of one’s own hair to achieve gratification, pleasure, or a relief of
tension).
Adjustment Disorders
Adjustment Disorders involve difficulty dealing with and adapting to specific
life stressors and circumstances. They require the development of emotional or
behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor(s) occurring within
3 months of the onset of the stressor(s). The manifestation of the adjustment
difficulty is marked by distress that exceeds what would typically be expected
from exposure to the stressor, causes significant impairment in social or occupational (academic) functioning, and the stress-related disturbance does not
meet the criteria for another specific Axis I disorder, nor is it merely an exacerbation of a preexisting Axis I or Axis II disorder.
Once the stressor (or its consequences) has terminated, the symptoms do
not persist for more than an additional 6 months. However, some stressors are
chronic or unremitting, for example, disabling physical injury.
136 Introduction
Personality Disorders
Personality disorders, by definition, are inflexible, pervasive, stable, and enduring, and lead to clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000). They typically manifest in early
adulthood although the prodromal symptoms may appear much earlier.
Individuals with PD are typically unaware of the extent of their problems
despite the sometimes overwhelming effects of their behaviors on themselves
and those around them. For many individuals, their patterns of thinking, feeling, and relating seem comfortable and familiar. It is very often the family,
friends, or coworkers of the individual with a personality disorder who find the
person’s patterns particularly troublesome. It is estimated that approximately
1% to 3% of the general population has a diagnosable personality disorder
(APA, 2000a). Many more individuals may suffer from subclinical levels of
character pathology. No two patients typically present with the exact same
combination of diagnostic criteria.
Some patients are superficially aware of the self-defeating nature of their
personality problems (e.g., overdependence, inhibition, excessive avoidance)
but are impotent in changing their behavior. Still other patients may recognize
their maladaptive behavioral patterns and have the motivation to change them,
but just do not have the skills to make it happen.
Axis II problems are not always diagnosed at treatment intake, though
early diagnosis and treatment planning are likely to be more effective. Many
Axis II patients are silent about their personality problems, or deny them, as a
reflection of the disorders.
The DSM has divided the personality disorders into three groups or clusters. Each cluster has a unifying theme that is overarching for the component
disorders.
Cluster A: Paranoid, Schizoid, and Schizotypal
The DSM-IV-TR describes this cluster as the odd or eccentric cluster (APA, 2000a).
Individuals with Cluster A personality disorders are less likely than other clusters to present for treatment. The relative lack of discomfort regarding their
experience may make it difficult for them to find the need or motivation to
change. Because they tend to prefer solitary activities, they may have fewer familial or social contacts encouraging (or pressuring) them to seek assistance.
The very nature of Paranoid Personality Disorder, is a suspicion of others,
which naturally extends to any potential therapeutic relationship, thereby impeding potential assistance. The schizotypal individual is uncomfortable with
others and may experience great distress in social situations. What is interesting is that this group is similar in style, though not degree to individuals with
schizophrenia. Schizotypal individuals have ideas of reference (incorrect interpretations of casual events as having special meaning for the individual). This
is differentiated from the schizophrenic individual who has delusions of reference that are far more strongly held and believed. Particular attention in the
assessment phase should be made with regard to the pervasiveness of the phenomenon, especially in the absence of overt psychotic phenomena, including
hallucinations.
Why People Become Patients 137
Cluster B: Antisocial, Borderline, Histrionic, and Narcissistic
The DSM-IV-TR defines this cluster as the dramatic and erratic cluster (APA,
2000a). Individuals with Cluster B personality disorders are frequently seen in
both inpatient and outpatient settings. Their manifestations are fairly easily detected and can be particularly dangerous (self-destructive or risk-taking).
These clients may be erratic and impulsive, and demonstrate a high potential
for harm to self or others.
Cluster C: Avoidant, Dependent, and Obsessive-Compulsive
The DSM-IV-TR describes Cluster C personality disorders as anxious and avoidant
(APA, 2000a). Some of the manifestations of Cluster C disorders are socially
desirable in moderation (e.g., learning to depend on others). In excess, however, they can cripple an individual.
Finally, there are problems that are common and often linked to normal
stresses and tensions in living. These include Relational Problems including Relational Problem Related to a Mental Disorder or General Medical Condition,
Parent-Child Relational Problems, Partner Relational Problems, and Sibling Relational Problems.
Problems related to abuse and neglect include the Physical Abuse of Child,
Sexual Abuse of Child, Neglect of a Child, Physical Abuse of Adult, including
partner physical abuse, and Sexual Abuse of an Adult.
Summary
As you can see by this thorough nomenclature, the classification of mental
disorders is a complex and difficult process. There are no easy answers, and
there are many disagreements about the current diagnostic schema. This system is, in fact, in the process of revision. The revisions will include possible
new categories, revision of older diagnoses, and alteration of certain diagnostic criteria to better reflect the empirical data, respond to social changes, add
new Axes, and make the diagnostic process easier for the clinician. It remains
to be seen whether greater detail and complexit


This chapter begins the focus on assessment in all aspects of clinical psychology. Different types of assessment have different goals, and these
purposes are articulated. Consideration is given to differences when assessments are geared toward direct service to patients, in consultation to other
professionals, and to answer specific clinical questions or monitor clinical progress. The biopsychosocial systems model is put forth as a comprehensive, integrative view of human behavior that frames assessment to be individualized,
yet inclusive.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Articulate at least three goals for clinical assessment.
• Describe the purpose for conducting at least three types of assessment
(cognitive assessment, personality assessment, and behavioral assessment).
• Explain the biopsychosocial systems model of understanding human behavior and why this multifaceted approach is critical to understanding
similarities and differences among people.
• Explain the role of biology, cognitions, behaviors, affect, social factors,
cultural factors, spiritual beliefs, and physical environment, in understanding how people think and behave.
• Provide an example of how assessing the biopsychosocial systems domains
of a person results in a comprehensive understanding of human behavior.
142 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
When you got dressed this morning, how did you choose your clothing? If
you are like most people, you thought about the temperature outside, where
you were planning to go today, whom you expected to see, and the clothes you
had available from which to choose. In essence, you made an assessment of your
clothing situation based on information you gathered from your environment;
your mood, thoughts, and feelings; and your goals for the day. The sociocultural
context within which you live also played a role in this decision by giving you
a sense of what type of clothing is acceptable or permitted in society or in the
situations you planned to encounter. In the most basic sense of the term, people make numerous assessments to navigate their way through day-to-day decisions, even if they are not cognizant of these decisions. Similarly, assessment is
a core component of all aspects of clinical psychology.
Researchers, administrators, clinicians, professors, and other practitioners
of clinical psychology use assessment as the foundation for everything they do.
Psychologists must evaluate psychological phenomena before initiating further
scientific investigation, before making changes in clinic or academic programs,
or before initiating therapy with clients. Graduate programs in clinical psychology provide students with knowledge and skills that qualify them to conduct,
administer, and interpret certain types of tests and assessments. This training
often distinguishes mental health professionals with graduate training in psychology from colleagues (social workers, special education teachers, psychiatrists, nurses) who are not prepared with a graduate psychology degree. Thus,
learning about assessment tools, techniques, processes, and ways to approach
assessment is critical for newly developing psychology professionals.
This chapter presents a psychological assessment paradigm that is based on
cognitive and behavioral principles, and behavioral assessment, broadly defined.
Behavioral assessment was defined by O’Leary and Wilson (1975) as “an attempt to identify the environmental and self-imposed variables which are currently (original authors’ emphasis) maintaining an individual’s maladaptive
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors . . .” (pp. 18–19). Although “behavioral assessment” has been defined in various ways (Cone, 1998), the O’Leary and Wilson
definition is most widely accepted (Silva, 1993). The goals of various types of
assessment, and the most common data collection strategies and techniques
used by clinical psychologists are introduced in this chapter. The biopsychosocial
systems model and a scientific approach to assessment (in Chapter 7) are provided as the conceptual frameworks in which to gather clinically useful information. Lastly, the clinical decision-making model (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989;
A. M. Nezu, Nezu, Friedman, & Haynes, 1997) is described in Chapter 8 as a
structure for clinicians’ to use in planning and conducting clinical assessments.
Goals of Assessment
There are many reasons for conducting a psychological assessment, and each
reason requires the assessor to initiate different tasks. Likewise, selecting methods and techniques for acquiring clinical information depends on the nature
and function of the assessment. Therefore, before learning how to conduct an
Introduction to Assessment 143
assessment, practitioners of clinical psychology must understand why or for
what purpose assessments are conducted.
In general, the major aims of assessments are to gather information about
persons, systems, environments, or phenomenon (or some combination of
these), and to enable classification, description, and comprehension or evaluation of
current circumstances. Assessments also may be directed to predict future behaviors (dangerousness, suicide) or circumstances (maintaining employment).
Commonly, assessments seek to respond to more than one of these goals at a
time and can be tailored to address several clinical or research questions.
Therefore, you will notice overlap among the strategies and techniques used for
collecting information for each purpose.
Diagnostic Assessment
The purpose of diagnostic assessment is to differentiate between “normal” and
“abnormal” behavior, to differentiate among various “abnormal” constellations
of symptoms, and to classify individuals based on identified abnormalities or
“presentation of disease” (Chaplin, 1985). Questions that diagnostic assessments can answer include the following examples. A 6-year-old child is having
trouble in school, and not staying in his seat during lessons: Does the child have
an attention deficit disorder, an anxiety disorder, or conduct disorder? A 68-
year-old female has been increasingly forgetful, less energetic, and confused: Is
she depressed or suffering from the onset of dementia? Why is the 35-year-oldmale having chest pains and rapid heart rates without any biological explanation for these symptoms? Answering such questions through diagnostic
assessments may lead to recommendations for treatment, establishment of the
clients’ eligibility (or ineligibility) for disability services (e.g., disability accommodations, reimbursement from insurance companies), or simply increased
understanding of patients’ symptoms, which will enable other health care practitioners to work more effectively with them.
Diagnostic assessments in a psychological setting are similar in concept to
physicians’ medical examinations. Medical patients arrive in physicians’ offices
for many reasons. Depending on the motivation for the visit, physicians either
focus on a specific complaint presented by the patient, or may evaluate the entire person in the search for “what’s wrong?” There is a clear mission to search
for abnormality or pathology, identify the malady, and report the findings. Typically, such an examination would lead to treatment if a disease or abnormality
were found. Seldom does a physician examine a patient only to identify optimal functioning; information is typically a by-product of the diagnostic or physical examination. Similarly, diagnostic psychological assessments tend to be
“disease” focused and are criticized (Follette & Hayes, 1992) for following a
deficit model, rather than a balanced model of strengths and deficits. Furthermore, behavioral and cognitive-behavioral psychologists (Follette, 1996, 1997)
criticize diagnostic assessments for excluding contextual information about antecedents, consequences, and social, physical, and cultural environmental factors from the evaluation of persons’ reported problems and symptoms.
Partially, this phenomenon is a function of the classification systems that guide
diagnostic evaluations.
144 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Classification Systems
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th Edition; DSM-IV-TR;
American Psychiatric Association, 2000) is the guide most commonly used by
mental health professionals in the United States for diagnosing psychological,
psychosocial, interpersonal and environmental problems in children, adolescents, and adults. The International Classification of Disorders-10 (ICD-10; WHO,
1992) is also used worldwide, and is the preferred classification system by
physicians.
Classification systems, as the basis for diagnostic assessments, are derived
from enormous amounts of research on very large samples of the population.
Their purpose is to provide nomothetic information. Nomothetic information is
information that establishes general principles, norms, or laws. With regard to
the DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) or ICD-10 (WHO,
1992), nomothetic information informs us how many people with certain characteristics, features, or symptoms may behave, interact with others, or reportedly feel about themselves, others, and the world around them. The information
differentiates persons with such characteristics, features, or symptoms from
data collected on large volumes of “normal” people, or individuals who do not
have difficulty in personal, social, occupational, or academic functioning.
For example, we know that many adults with major depressive disorders
often have persistent feelings of extreme hopelessness about their future, and
they have felt this way for an extended period (2 weeks or more; American
Psychiatric Association, 2000). Nondepressed, normal persons, while in a temporary negative mood state, may endorse intermittent feelings of hopelessness
about specific situations or momentary feelings of hopelessness about their futures, but they do not typically report enduring feelings of hopelessness under
ordinary circumstances. It is important to remember, however, that information in the DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 is based on average scores and commonalities
in self-reports or evaluations, and that there are variations within the group
and exceptions to the rules and criteria established. Therefore, not all persons
who meet criteria for a Major Depressive Disorder will endorse having persistent feelings of hopelessness, but they will likely overlap with the majority
group in other symptomatology.
The classification systems continue to evolve in accordance with the development in the fields of clinical and social psychology, anthropology, and epidemiology. The DSM-IV-TR is revised periodically to include information about
populations and variables that had been underrepresented in the past. In the
most recent revision, the task forces in charge of improving on the DSM-IV-TR
have increased attention to diversity and cultural factors and strive to increase
understanding and classification of patterns of symptoms that may warrant a
diagnosis or specific nomenclature in future additions.
Diagnostic manuals have significant merits and have allowed for a certain
degree of standardization in the field of clinical psychology. They provide a
means for professionals to communicate about clients or patients, and disseminate synthesized conclusions from volumes of research. Psychologists gear diagnostic assessments, in part, to seek confirmation or disconfirmation of persons’
fit with nomothetic information. The DSM-IV-TR provides a starting point for
understanding clients’ clinical presentations and for determining general directions for treatment planning. However, to solely rely on nomothetic information
Introduction to Assessment 145
would be equivalent to taking a cookbook approach to identifying persons’
problems and solutions to their problems. As you know from your own experience with others, and from reading Chapter 5 of this book, people are much
more complex! Relying on group norms and typical or common presentations
would be misleading in diagnosis and treatment. Psychologists also have an ethical obligation to consider personal characteristics of individuals assessed to ensure tests are valid for the person tested, interpretation of data is appropriate,
and recommendations based on test data are culturally and individually relevant (APA, 2003, 9.0). As such, nomothetic information is balanced and integrated with ideographic (individual) information. Ideographic assessments are
characteristic of behavioral assessments, and are defined and discussed in more
detail later in this chapter.
Logistics and Details of Diagnostic Assessments
Mental health professionals who have training and experience using the DSMIV-TR or ICD-10, and specialized measures, inventories, or structured interviews
use these tools to conduct diagnostic assessments for a variety of purposes. The
APA Ethical Principles and Code of Conduct (APA, 2003) specifies that only
trained qualified individuals should use psychological tests, and outlines the
cautions to be taken. Clients or family members of clients might request a diagnostic assessment. Clinicians routinely incorporate diagnostic assessments into
their standard practices for evaluating new clients for treatment planning. Nonmental health professional colleagues (medical professionals, school administrators, teachers), or mental health professionals who desire more precise
understanding of their patients’ presentations of symptoms may request consultation with professionals trained to conduct diagnostic assessments. Diagnostic
assessments may also be conducted to screen, classify, or assign individuals for
clinical research studies according to the information obtained. Likewise, forensic psychologists may conduct diagnostic assessments to determine clients’ mental competencies to stand trial or mental states related to committed crimes.
Depending on the complexity of the client’s presentation of symptoms, a
diagnostic assessment may be accomplished through interviewing alone, or
may require interviewing in combination with other tests and measurements.
A diagnostic assessment may be one component of a comprehensive evaluation
of an individual, or it may be the sole purpose of an assessment. Although diagnostic assessments may be repeated over time to determine whether temporal
symptoms have been alleviated, certain diagnoses are considered unremitting,
lifelong conditions (antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorders; A. T. Beck, Freeman, Davis, & Associates, 2004), and therefore, reevaluation may not occur. Unlike some forms of
behavioral assessment, practitioners may conduct diagnostic assessments in almost any setting in which they work. These evaluations are not dependent on
viewing clients in their naturalistic environments.
Clinical Examples
EXAMPLE 1 For a client who is self-referred to a psychologist specializing in
sleep disorders, a diagnostic assessment is necessary to determine if the client
indeed has a sleep disorder, and if so, what kind; or to determine if the sleep
difficulties are secondary to other medical or psychological problems. Once the
146 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
psychologist determines the nature of the client’s difficulty, treatment interventions may be offered, or an appropriate referral made if the sleep difficulties
are determined to be secondary to another psychological or medical problem.
EXAMPLE 2 Ms. Latte requested an evaluation to determine if she had an Attention Deficit Disorder. Ms. Latte saw a special program on television, and
recognized that troubles she had learned to live with and work around were
consistent with those of the televised woman with this reported diagnosis.
Ms. Latte was functioning reasonably well, but has always felt “alone” in her
problems, and “embarrassed” for being “scatterbrained” and distractible. Her
goal for the assessment was simply to identify if her history and current patterns of behavior were consistent with this diagnosis. She believed that gaining this information would allow her to alleviate some of her self-deprecating
thoughts and hard feelings, help her husband understand that her problems
were not volitional, and possibly gain recommendations for improving her
daily functioning.
EXAMPLE 3 In psychiatric emergency rooms, psychologists may conduct diagnostic assessments to determine patients’ needed level of care, and to communicate this information to triage facilities (inpatient unit, partial program, or
outpatient clinic) before discharging or admitting patients to other units for follow-up care.
EXAMPLE 4 If someone you know told you that her child has a reading disability, would you know how to help your friend assess the services that her child
needs? Most professionals would need more specific information to develop
recommendations or a treatment plan. For starters, what are the child’s current
learning strengths and difficulties, environmental supports, learning strategies
used, individual and family expectations, and self-efficacy beliefs? Note that
you can ethically help a friend consider services that might be appropriate for a
particular disorder, but you cannot ethically give recommendations or treatment plans on a casual basis to personal friends and acquaintances. Assessments, just like therapy, must always be conducted within the boundaries of a
formal professional relationship (see APA, 2002, 3.05, 3.06, 9.01).
Descriptive Assessments
Descriptive assessments, broadly described, are conducted to learn more about
clients’ cognitive functioning, psychosocial functioning, academic achievement, personality, behavior, or specific needs within an identified area of
interest (e.g., caregivers’ needs). Assessment questions may focus on individuals, families, groups of people (e.g., group home setting; hospital unit), or
person-environment interactions (e.g., goodness of fit between a developmentally disabled adult and her social rehabilitation program setting). Mental
health professionals conduct these assessments to obtain background and general information necessary for better understanding of clients’ problems and
factors contributing to those problems. Such assessments aid professionals in
planning treatment, providing academic or occupational counseling, and de-
Introduction to Assessment 147
signing group or individual behavior modification interventions. Researchers
or program evaluators may use descriptive assessments to provide end-users of
their work with information about populations or programs under study.
Descriptive assessments are often combined with diagnostic assessments,
and some methods of evaluation will accomplish data collection for both purposes. Data collection techniques for descriptive assessments include a combination of interviews, observation, self-report inventories and questionnaires,
reports by others, computerized assessment, and physiological assessment.
Clinical psychologists with proper training can conduct most types of descriptive assessments. Psychologists also commonly specialize in assessments for
specific aged populations (e.g., children/adolescents, adults, senior adults), disorders (e.g., learning disabilities, traumatic brain injury, Huntington’s chorea)
or psychosocial problems (e.g., court-adjudicated offenders).
Prediction Assessments
While evaluation of current functioning is critical to most types of assessment,
under certain circumstances, psychologists are also asked or required to predict
clients’ future behaviors or the effect or impact that situations or life events
will have on individuals’ thoughts, feelings, behaviors, or overall functioning.
Predictive assessments are often necessary in or for medical, forensic, and occupational settings, and traditional mental health in- and outpatient settings.
Given the uniqueness of individuals, and the inconsistency of behaviors characteristic of persons with certain personality disorders or other problems, most
predictive assessments remain tentative and qualified as “best estimations.”
The accuracy of any assessment, but especially of predictive assessments, relies
on the availability, accuracy, and reliability of data about the predictor and predicted variables (Haynes & O’Brien, 2000). Predictor variables are those factors
that are presumed to precede or co-occur with the behavior to be predicted,
and to be causally related in some way.
Some behaviors are more easily predictable than others. Assuming we
have comprehensive information leading to the diagnosis, it is likely that a
young adult with social anxiety, without treatment, will have difficulty delivering his 30-minute presentation to the 75 students in his college course; an
older adult who had little social support other than her recently deceased
spouse, who also has a history of poor coping skills, may be likely to have difficulty adjusting to widowhood, and may suffer from complicated bereavement.
Such predictions are fairly easy to make, given a thorough assessment of past
behavior, current functioning, and other psychosocial variables, and the predictable nature of the behaviors in question.
When more difficult predictions of future behavior are requested or necessary, significant consequences may be associated with the outcome of the
evaluation. For example, predictions of suicide risk, dangerousness, psychological suitability for specific medical treatments, or prediction of psychological
preparedness for parenthood (adoption) require psychologists to gain as much
certainty as possible, since the consequences related to poor or inadequate assessment can obviously be grave. The APA Code of Ethics (APA, 2003, 9.01)
cautions that predictions or recommendations made based on assessments
148 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
should specify the sources of data collected and that for mandated individuals
specifically (and all others, generally), appropriate informed consent must be
obtained (9.03). Some examples of prediction assessments will illustrate the
complexities of this work.
Psychologists working in almost any clinical setting will be faced with the
need to conduct suicide and dangerousness risk assessments. Current suicide
symptoms and homicidal ideation are standard components of most psychologists’ intake assessment and mental status examination. When clients endorse
suicidal or homicidal ideation (thoughts), further evaluation is necessary to determine the severity of these thoughts, the clients’ likelihood of acting on these
thoughts and plans to do so, and their ability or access to the means by which
they could execute their plans. Based on thorough assessments, clinical psychologists are expected to make predictions about a client’s safety and the
safety of others, before they can release the client from their presence. However, Rudd and Joiner (1998) emphasize that although the court system seems
to imply that clinicians should be able to predict suicide, empirical data show
that “prediction” models of suicide consistently fail (see Rudd & Joiner for references to these studies); therefore, the complexity of this task cannot be overstated. Based on research reviewed by Rudd and Joiner, clinicians’ “risk”
assessments (focusing on patients’ current state) are more accurate and reliable
than actual predictions (implying future behavior) of suicide attempts or completion. Risk assessment for suicide consists of evaluation of predisposing factors (e.g., age, sex, previous psychiatric diagnosis, history of suicidality), acute
and chronic risk factors and precipitating factors (current stressors or losses,
such as job, loved ones, physical or cognitive ability, chronic pain, affective disorders, poor problem-solving skills, social isolation, poor impulse control), and
protective factors (active involvement in treatment, good physical health, good
problem-solving ability, social support, hopefulness; see Rudd & Joiner for a
complete review of references).
In medical settings, physicians constantly make decisions and predictions
about patients’ likely physical response to medications, medical interventions
(e.g., surgery, radiation, organ transplantation), and treatments (e.g., light
therapy). However, many physicians recognize that biological responses are not
the only concern. Patients’ compliance with medical regimens and ability to
cope with necessary lifestyle and behavioral changes can be equally important.
Clinical (or clinical health) psychologists aid physicians’ decision making and
treatment planning for patients by conducting predictive assessments relating
to these issues.
For example, organ transplant recipients must comply with medication
and behavioral (bone marrow transplant recipients must stay away from
crowds for 6 months to 1 year, due to low immune functioning) regimens following transplants. Many recipients take as many as 5 to 10 medications following the transplant, including anti-rejection medications to prevent their
bodies from rejecting the new organ. If patients do not comply with this requirement, fatal consequences could result. Physicians, therefore, want to be
as certain as possible that treatment is truly in an individual’s best interest.
Likewise, individuals with histories of drug or alcohol abuse may be questionable candidates for some medical treatments because of the potential for them
to cope poorly with the short- or long-term effects of treatment, and the
Introduction to Assessment 149
lethality of mixing alcohol or drugs with the prescribed regimen they may be
given. Psychologists must assess patients’ past behaviors, current functioning
(emotional state, desire or motivation for treatment, coping skills), psychosocial resources (strength in faith or spirituality, social support), and other factors, to evaluate the strengths and potential threats or weaknesses that can
impact future behavior.
Psychologists working in forensic settings are likely to conduct predictive
assessments for various reasons. For offender populations, prediction of recidivism is likely required as part of court system procedures relating to sentencing
and parole, and defendant- and plaintiff-initiated evaluations. Family/marital
lawyers also frequently hire clinical and forensic psychologists to evaluate
clients’ current functioning (descriptive assessment or diagnostic assessment),
and predict future behaviors. Behaviors of interest in family/marital law might
include clients’ likelihood of future abusive behaviors; clients’ future abilities to
manage anger and aggression if rehabilitation is sought; clients’ likelihood of
complying with child custody mandates and abilities to maintain effective parenting skills, and children’s predicted responses to custody arrangements. Numerous other examples exist.
Occupational settings provide rich opportunities for psychological assessment. Questions to be answered in occupational settings may relate to the
workforce in a company as a whole, or individuals within a workforce. Prediction assessments might be sought to answer questions such as the following
ones: What is the likelihood of this employee’s occupational success, given the
specific accommodations and training available? What variables are predictive
of burnout in persons with a particular job or position (Mack, 2004; Schober &
Felgoise, 2002)? What is the likely psychological impact of a specified corporate
change on upper-level management? Psychologists working in employee assistance programs may conduct more traditional clinical prediction assessments.
Review
Psychological assessments generally seek to classify, describe, or predict clients’
psychological functioning and behaviors. Many referral or assessment questions require evaluations structured to accomplish more than one of these
goals. Clinical psychologists conduct assessments in various settings, assuming
various roles (e.g., consultant, health care team, independent practitioner).
Thus far, descriptions and examples of the goals and types of assessments clinical psychologists conduct have remained general. The following section describes several specific types of assessment that are conducted to answer
specific questions.
Specific Types of Assessment
To differentiate among the different types of assessment, several key questions
are answered within each of the following subsections to address the elements
of what, when, who, where, why, and how. What are the goals of the assessment? When, relative to other life events, will the assessment take place? Who
150 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
requests the evaluation or who refers clients for specific assessments? Who is
(are) the person(s) to be evaluated? Where will the assessment be conducted?
Why is the assessment necessary? How will the information be used? The answers to these questions vary depending on the assessment prescribed. Some
overlap is also noted as the different applications of assessment are illustrated.
Although classifying an individual as mentally retarded may be useful for
communicating a person’s general functioning level among professionals, describing the person’s strengths, weaknesses, likes and dislikes, will be equally or
more important in the development of a behavior modification plan.
Cognitive Assessment
Cognitive assessment focuses on understanding brain-behavior relationships,
information processing, and thinking skills. The following critical aspects of
cognition may be targeted for assessment: attention, perception, memory,
schemas, learning (intelligence; achievement; aptitude), cognitive development, creativity, language, problem solving, decision making, and judgment.
Neuropsychological tests, intelligence tests, achievement and aptitude tests,
and development tests are specific types of cognitive assessments for evaluating
these areas.
Clinicians who conduct or request cognitive assessments are interested
in understanding individuals’ skills (strengths and deficits), abilities, and limits, and comparing these skills and abilities with clients’ own displayed affect
and behaviors. Individuals’ functioning is usually compared with their own
previous or prospective functioning, to normative standards predetermined by
research, or both. Some high schools require youth football players (and other
sports participants) to have cognitive assessments prior to beginning the football season. These baseline assessments provide individual norms that are
later used for comparison with postinjury (concussions) cognitive assessments if football players are hurt during the season. Cognitive assessments
may be conducted periodically to evaluate positive or negative change over
time, such as yearly achievement testing in language development or mathematics skills. Intelligence testing exemplifies an assessment done to evaluate
individuals’ functioning compared with normative standards: parents may request IQ (intelligence quotient) testing to determine children’s scholastic
needs and readiness to begin elementary school, or later in life for psychoeducational planning.
Other reasons cognitive assessments may be indicated are numerous.
Cognitive assessments may be required when persons are not reaching expected developmental milestones, such as language skills. Self-recognition or
by others of nonnormative (nonaverage) behavior, either positive (superior intellectual abilities, creativity), or negative (attention problems, extreme emotional lability), often generates referrals for cognitive assessment. Significant
changes in cognitive functioning are usually noticed by individuals, family,
and friends, and often lead to visits to primary care physicians or emergency
rooms; these health professionals may require psychologists’ assistance in diagnosing or understanding the cause for the behavior change (Rozensky,
Sweet, & Tovian, 1997). Such sudden or gradual behavior changes may have
Introduction to Assessment 151
resulted from a known external event (accident), or a known or initially unknown biological change (tumor, medication side-effects, aging process).
Thus, as these examples demonstrate, cognitive assessments are useful for individuals across the life span, for purposes of diagnosis, understanding, and
treatment or future planning.
Intellectual Assessments and Intelligence Tests
Although intelligence tests are technically encompassed by discussion of cognitive assessments, their popularity warrants more detailed description. Numerous experts have defined intelligence in various ways, and history dating back to
the 1800s reveals the development and controversy over the concept of intelligence and its measurement (see Sternberg, 1999, pp. 470–477 for a review).
According to Sternberg’s (1999) review of a more recent study (Sternberg &
Detterman, 1986), the consensus definition of intelligence among 24 cognitive
psychologists with expertise in intelligence research is as follows: “the capacity
to learn from experience, using metacognitive processes to enhance learning,
and the ability to adapt to the surrounding environment, which may require
different adaptations within different social and cultural contexts” (p. 469).
Thus, there are basic components of intelligence that are germane to all people,
and also unique considerations that must be made for persons of different gender, culture, race, and advantaged or disadvantaged backgrounds.
Intellectual assessments, and the tests used to conduct them, are among
the most commonly thought of psychological tests among nonpsychologists.
School psychologists, counseling psychologists, and clinical psychologists all use
intelligence tests for a variety of purposes, but most often for educational and
vocational planning (for persons with intellectual disabilities or giftedness), and
as a part of general cognitive assessment (see previous examples). At one time
or another, you may have been given a version of a standardized intelligence test
such as a Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence—Revised (for
ages 3 to 7, WPPSI-R; Wechsler, 1989), Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children—Third Edition (for ages 6 through 16; WISC-III; Wechsler, 1991), Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (for ages 16 through 89; WAIS-III; Psychological
Corporation, 1997; Wechsler, 1997), or the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales
(Fourth Edition; Thorndike, Hagen, & Sattler, 1986). The Wechsler scales are the
most popular intellectual assessment tools in use, followed by the StanfordBinet Scales. Nonverbal intellectual tests, such as the General Ability Measure
for Adults (GAMA), also exist to assess intellectual functioning in individuals
with minimal to no English language ability, such as individuals with limited
formal education, those who are deaf or hearing impaired, or who are from nonEnglish speaking cultures (Bardos, 2001). The GAMA is purported to be free of
bias from expressive language skills and overall academic achievement.
David Wechsler, developer of the Wechsler Scales, believed intelligence
comprises cognitive, affective, and motivational factors (Ryan & Lopez, 2001).
As such, he created the Wechsler Scales based on items and measures selected
from existing ability tests (see Ryan & Lopez for review). The results of the
WAIS-III, WISC-III, and previous versions of these tests (WAIS, WAIS-R, WISC,
WISC-R) provide three separate intelligence quotient scores: Verbal IQ, Performance IQ, and the Full Scale IQ, which is an overall quotient of abilities. The
152 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
raw scores for these tests are converted into standardized/scaled scores to enable comparison of individual scores with normative scores, according to age.
The scaled scores are then summed and converted to IQ scores, which can be
compared across age, regardless of which Wechsler IQ score was used to arrive
at the IQ results. Psychologists also closely analyze comparative performance
across subtests, which reveals information about cognitive strengths and weaknesses, possible neuropsychological problems, emotional problems (e.g., depression), and other important clinical material. As with all assessment, data
from intelligence tests is always interpreted in the context of other information
gathered from a broad-based assessment. We discuss broad-based assessment at
a later point.
Users of intelligence tests are required to have training and experience,
usually through graduate education, in administration of standardized psychological tests. Administration of these tests requires strict adherence to test
manual guidelines and clinical judgment and knowledge pertaining to the intricacies of standardized tests. Interpretation of the test data is a complex task
requiring clinical knowledge, judgment, and great care. The ability to establish
and maintain rapport with test-takers is also deemed important. Lastly, clinical skill and professionalism are required to provide feedback to test-takers,
their parents, and the original referral source (school, physician, guardian),
since the results can significantly impact (positively or negatively) the course
of the examinee’s future. The APA Code of Ethics (APA, 2003, 9.10) distinctly
indicates this importance by stating psychologists must be the provider of feedback, regardless of whether employees or other individuals administered the
test batteries.
Personality Assessment
Definition of Personality
Various theorists have defined personality in many ways, over the many years
that the discipline of psychology has evolved. Most definitions and theorists
have agreed that personality refers to stable, enduring characteristics that
uniquely define individuals’ ways of being or of viewing life situations, the
world, and others in it (see Chaplin, 1985, for various definitions). Furthermore, personality may be defined using the terminology of individuals’ temperament and traits.
Temperament refers to a person’s disposition and is often assumed to be
largely biologically predetermined. Much research on temperament has been
conducted on infants and children (Kamphaus & Frick, 1996). Equating temperament with personality may be appropriate according to some psychological
theories, especially those rooted in the psychodynamic traditions or medical
models; other theories might suggest that persons are born with a particular
temperament, and stable characteristics develop in addition to this biologically
predetermined disposition to result in personality.
Traits refer to individuals’ relatively stable ways of thinking or behaving,
or their disposition that may develop over time. The term trait implies that the
environment and one’s interaction with it or others may formatively develop
Introduction to Assessment 153
one’s personality. Traits differ from persons’ behaviors—traits refer to how people are; behaviors describe what people do. If you had to describe your best
friend in three sentences, what would you say? Perhaps, you might say that
your friend is “fun or funny,” “loyal,” “kind and compassionate,” “trustworthy,” “sociable,” “outgoing,” or other similar descriptors. Most people define
others in global terms, describing the most characteristic style of the individuals. They attach these global terms based on behaviors they have observed.
Your friend may be described as “funny” because she tells jokes and elicits
laughter. Some people are described as having “different personalities” depending on the social context (e.g., social versus business). Descriptors, such as
those of your friend, are typically representative of the combination of temperament and traits, or his or her “personality.”
How did you arrive at the description of your friend? If you are like most
people, you have observed your friend in various situations or in interactions
with you. You observed her behavior and the emotions she expressed. You also
noticed her consistent ways of viewing herself and relating to others and her
environment, and made inferences based on these observations. In essence,
you have conducted a personality assessment, because formal assessment relies
on similar processes!
Possible goals of formal personality assessment are diagnosis and understanding of persons’ ways of relating to others and the environment for the purpose of description, prediction, and treatment in clinical or counseling (career
or vocational) settings, employment settings, or forensic settings, among others.
In your assessment of your friend, you have diagnosed (classified your friend)
and attempted to understand him or her. (Don’t worry; if you have chosen to
pursue a career in clinical psychology, you will often be accused of or asked if
you are analyzing your friends anyway!) Substantial training in psychometrics,
test theory, test development, diversity variables (ethnicity, race, culture, gender, age, language, disabilities), and supervised experience are required for use
of most psychological tests, including personality tests (S. M. Turner, DeMers,
Fox, & Reed, 2001).
Objective and Projective Tests
Formal personality assessments use objective or projective measurement techniques rather than casual observation. Objective measurement techniques are
developed based on empirical test development strategies, have established
psychometric properties (reliability, validity; see later discussion), and tend to
be atheoretical (Kamphaus & Frick, 1996). Interpretation of data collected
from objective measurements is done by comparison of individual scores to a
clinical sample of persons with the same background (e.g., age, education
level) or diagnosis of interest. Examples of objective measurement techniques
used in personality assessment include the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory-2 (MMPI-2; Duckworth & Anderson, 1995), the Millon Clinical
Multiaxial Inventory-III (MCMI-III; Millon, 1994), and the Sixteen Personality
Factor (16PF) Questionnaire (Conn & Rieke, 1994).
Projective assessment techniques and clinicians’ interpretations of the
data collected from them are grounded in clinicians’ or test developers’ choice
of personality theory (Freudian theory, Jungian theory, Adlerian theory, or
154 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
others). Projective tests are more ambiguous from the viewpoint of the testtaker. In other words, objective tests usually consist of direct questions requiring direct responses, usually in the form of choices provided; projective
measures rely on stimuli that could elicit unlimited response possibilities from
clients, without providing them with response choices. Examples of commonly used projective tests include the Rorschach Inkblots (Exner, 1993a,
1993b), the Thematic Apperception Test (Murray, 1943), sentence completion
tests (Lah, 2001), and human figure drawings tests for children (Bardos &
Powell, 2001).
Both objective and projective tests are prone to error in administration if
test manuals are not explicit, or if administrators do not follow the directions
carefully. The interpretation of results from most projective tests is also subject
to variations resulting from clinicians’ biases since they make more assumptions in their interpretations than in those of objective tests about patients’ dynamics and behaviors across situations, persons, and time, and the etiology of
such patterns.
Behavioral Assessment
Behavioral assessment aims to identify the frequency, context, and most importantly, the function of a person’s behavior. The focus of behavioral assessment
is on individual, specific behaviors and comparison of the person’s behavior
across situations and in different environments (home, school, work, social situations). Behavioral assessment developed from the principles of behavioral
therapy, and therefore, emphasizes the importance of behavioral chains, or the
relationships between stimuli and responses, and behaviors and consequences.
In the truest sense, behavioral assessments focus only on operationally defined,
overt, observable behavior that can be objectively measured. Behavior has been
more broadly defined over time with the merging of the cognitive and behavioral theoretical orientations and principles. Behaviors sometimes may refer to
cognitive processes such as coping, which has overt and covert components. Behaviorists may accept this leniency in the definition with the caveat that covert
processes may be considered internal behaviors (O’Brien, Linehan, Dowd,
Kohlenberg, & Nezu, 1999). For the purpose of this discussion, however, behavioral assessment will be reviewed in its truest form.
In general, psychologists might adopt a behavioral assessment paradigm as
a means for evaluating clients and conceptualizing their problems (Haynes &
O’Brien, 2000; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997). As a paradigm, clinicians who base all
assessments on this model do so because it is usually largely consistent with
their theoretical orientation to understanding human behavior, and their approach to assessment and treatment of patients. Chapter 7 in this book is based
in cognitive and behavioral assessment principles.
Behavioral Assessment Questions
What types of question do you think are best suited to a behavioral assessment? Consider the following clinical applications. How frequently does Susan
binge-eat? Under what conditions is Stacy likely to scream and curse at her
Introduction to Assessment 155
partner—what are the antecedents or provoking stimuli to this behavior? What
maintaining variables reinforce Michael’s thumb sucking? What potentially
useful intervention strategies could Raphael’s teacher implement to increase
his attention in the classroom and decrease his noncompliant behavior? Why
does Lola become withdrawn and anxious in some social situations, and yet she
is sociable and conversant in other situations?
Because behavioral assessment may be somewhat of a specialty or a subtype of clinical assessment in general, it is unlikely that referral sources outside
the mental health field will specifically request a “behavioral assessment.” Instead, individuals will phrase their referral question in such a way that clinicians will select behavioral assessment techniques as the means to best evaluate
the behaviors in question. In the most optimal situation, behavioral assessment
will be conducted in the client’s natural setting in which the behaviors are most
likely to naturally occur. However, time, cost, and appropriateness might limit
this option. If so, alternative methods are used to evaluate the behavior under
simulated or somewhat artificial conditions. Or data might be collected by
laypersons involved with the individual, following instruction and training by
the clinician in charge of the evaluation. Lastly, clients may be instructed to
self-monitor their behaviors, although this method is less reliable in most cases.
Ideographic Focus of Behavioral Assessment
Ideographic information is essentially the opposite of nomothetic information;
an ideographic approach to diagnosis and assessment focuses on individual behaviors (overt or covert) and patterns of these behaviors, rather than on group
norms. If an individual reports extended feelings of sadness, depressed mood,
hopelessness, helplessness, and other depressive symptoms, knowing only that
this person’s symptoms are similar to others with the same classification, in a
general sense, will not provide the detailed information necessary to fully understand this individual or effect change. The ideographic assessor must determine the severity and frequency of the specific symptoms, consistent with a
nomothetic approach to assessment. In addition, much more information will
be sought. What developmental factors, recent stressors, or relevant stimuli
contribute to the onset of these symptoms; what thoughts, feelings, behaviors,
or situations maintain the individual’s depressed mood state (A. M. Nezu &
Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997)? Ideally, professionals in clinical psychology will assess individuals in a manner that includes nomothetic information
for understanding of normative and nonnormative behavior and symptoms, and
gather ideographic information to maximize individual understanding and the
potential for designing effective interventions.
Selection of Behavioral Assessment Techniques
Because behavioral assessment is largely, if not entirely, consistent with the scientific method, the principles discussed in the section on the scientific approach to assessment describe the approach psychologists take to behavioral
assessment. Clinicians adhering to the principles of behavioral assessment emphasize rater/instrument-reliability (versus subject/target behavior reliability)
and validity as criteria for choosing evaluation tools and methods. Observation
techniques, simulated or analog experiences (e.g., role-plays), self-monitoring,
156 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
and ratings by others are all techniques that are frequently used in behavioral
assessment; these techniques are discussed in detail in this subsection.
You may be wondering how this differs from observations made during
interviews or for mental status examinations, and if you are, this is a good
question. The most obvious differences in observations and evaluations made
by behavioral assessors lie in the reliance on operational definitions not only of
the behavior being observed, but also of the increments of time (or frequency)
in which the behavior(s) is (are) being measured, and the settings in which the
behavior occurs (generalization of behaviors). If a clinician was observing and
assessing the social skills of a client, in a true behavioral assessment, it would
most likely not be sufficient to simply state that eye contact was or was not
made if that was a target behavior. Rather, “eye contact” would be operationally defined (Does a glance count? How long does the contact have to be
maintained?), and the period of time in which it was or was not made would be
delineated. A behavioral psychologist might consider how often a person makes
eye contact during a 5-minute conversation, either by counting the times the
client looks at the other person, and then looks away (frequency count in a 5-
minute interval), or by assessing occurrence versus nonoccurrence in specified
increments of time (e.g., 1-minute intervals), in which the specific number of
times eye contact is made within each minute interval is less important. Also,
the behavioral assessor will be interested in knowing if this behavior changes
across settings, people, or situations. This level of specificity provides more precise data from which specific recommendations for change or maintenance can
be made, and thus, differentiates casual observation from behavioral observation as part of a behavioral assessment. Furthermore, the stimuli and consequences would also likely be documented, with the goal of understanding the
function of the behavior within the context of the environment and others. To
collect such specific data, assessors are considered to be a clinical tool and,
therefore, require sufficient training to ensure that ratings are reliable, accurate, and valid.
The Biopsychosocial Systems Model of Understanding
Human Behavior
The biopsychosocial systems model, in concept, if not by name, has been
widely adopted by cognitive and behavioral psychologists (Belar & Deardorff,
1995; Koerner & Linehan, 1997; McDaniel, 1995; A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989;
A. M. Nezu et al., 1997; Persons & Tompkins, 1997) and others (e.g., Caspar,
1997) as the schema for understanding individuals’ presentation of problems,
symptoms, and attributes. This model is presented as a logical way for clinicians
to organize their approach to data collection and treatment formulation (described in Chapter 8). The biopsychosocial systems model (Schwartz, 1982) assumes that individuals are complex organisms, and the interplay of their
biology, cognitions, affect, behaviors, social and physical environments, largely
determine their daily functioning and general well-being. Spirituality and cul-
ture, broadly defined, are other important domains, which may permeate each
of the target areas described. According to the biopsychosocial model and behavioral theory, problems may result from multiple causal factors (Haynes,
1992; Kazdin & Kagan, 1994) across these target domains, and therefore, assessments must be broad-based. Clinicians should explore individual functioning within each target area, including strengths and weaknesses, so that on
completion of the assessment, a comprehensive picture of the person can be
drawn to contextually understand the information originally sought.
Most variables within each of the biopsychosocial target areas are assumed to be dynamic and are expected to vary across persons and within persons across time, situations, and settings (Haynes, 1998). Clinicians should
assume that people change over time, as do their problems, and similar problems in different individuals often are the result of different causal variables. A
multimethod, multimodal, multiinformant, time-series assessment is described
in Chapter 7 to address these issues.
The foundation for the biopsychosocial systems model as it is applied here
stems from several theoretical and scientific traditions. George Engel (1977)
originated the biopsychosocial model in the field of medicine. Advances in science and medicine have contributed to knowledge about organisms and biological bases of behavior, and he expanded the medical model to consider other
factors pertaining to human behavior. Psychologists working in medical settings
readily adopted this model (McDaniel, 1995); health psychologists—and later
clinical psychologists—recognized the value of assuming a holistic approach to
mental and physical health care.
Theoretically, the model makes sense to cognitive-behavioral clinical
psychologists, perhaps due to the tenets of social learning theory (Bandura,
1977). Social learning theory explains that investigating reciprocal personenvironment (social, physical) relationships is critical to understanding
human thinking and behavior (Bandura, 1977) as opposed to studying persons in isolation. Evaluating the interactions of biological, social, and psychological variables provides critical information necessary for selection and
change of target behaviors or problems. Psychologists have advocated for a
multimodal approach to assessment of individuals’ problems for many years
(Haynes, 1998; Haynes & O’Brien, 2000; Kanfer & Schefft, 1988; A. A.
Lazarus, 1989; Salovey & Turk, 1991). However, the popularity of the biopsychosocial systems model has increased over the past 20 to 30 years as research
has provided more substantial evidence that the mind and body are interactive and intertwined entities, rather than separate systems (see Hergenhahn,
1992, for a review of historical perspectives), and the roles of spirituality and
religion in psychology have become increasingly investigated.
Target Domains in the Biopsychosocial Systems Model
Assessment of each target area requires more than a simple checklist of items
for each individual. In fact, the pertinent information will vary for each individual. Topographically, however, the examples that follow provide operational
definitions for each target domain. Data within each topic comprises historical
(developmental or recent past history) and current information about the
Introduction to Assessment 157
individual client, and historical and current information about relevant family
members or significant others, and society, if relevant. Given the enormous
amount of information potentially captured by each target area, developing clinicians are reminded to consider each target area across personal, social, and
occupational/vocational situations, various physical settings, and public and
private domains. Information should be obtained about adaptive, maladaptive,
and neutral characteristics or behaviors of each individual.
Biology
Although some health professionals might suggest that mental health problems
are the result of chemical imbalances or biological predispositions, biology in this
model refers to concrete, objective, measurable physical, biological, or physiological characteristics or data. Data collected in this target area about the patient/client include age, sex, physical health, nutrition, heart rate, medical data
(results of blood tests, diabetes, hypertension, fevers), and somatic complaints
(upset stomach, muscle tension, fatigue). Historical information might include
an adult’s report of orthopedic problems in childhood, significant illnesses or
surgeries, or familial history of diabetes or cancer. Clinicians should always inquire about menstruation (onset, regularity/problems, and menopause) of adolescent girls and women, since fluctuations in hormones and changes in mood
are often related. Reports of medications routinely taken provide important biological information, since chemical agents can alter other aspects of persons’
biochemistry, mood, behaviors, and so on. Illicit drugs and alcohol are often
classified as biological variables for similar reasons. Use of illicit drugs and alcohol as a means of coping may also be categorized as behaviors, depending on the
context of the report.
Biological factors and biological assessment of neurotransmitters and
brain physiology, brain tissue, genetics, brain metabolism, cerebral blood
flow, and brain imaging are topic areas that are important to the understanding of human behavior. Scientists in this field have learned much about mental disorders (e.g., dementia, schizophrenia) from studying brain anatomy
and neurobiology, but their work largely remains in the research domain.
Since molecular biological studies do not, yet, directly impact or translate
into clinical assessments (Sweeney, Dick, & Srinivasagam, 1998), the procedures and processes used are not described here. Interested readers are referred to psychiatric journals, such as Archives of General Psychiatry and Journal
of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, to sample studies produced from this research area.
Affect
Affect refers to a “broad class of mental processes, including feeling, emotions,
moods, and temperament” (Chaplin, 1985, p. 14). Some psychologists define
mood as a global or general feeling state, and affect as a temporal feeling state,
analogous to the weather-related terms climate and temperature. Others view
mood as a subjective report of one’s feeling state (temporal), and affect as the
objective, observable mood state (also temporal) or display of emotions. Sometimes an individual’s affect seems unremarkable; the person seems neither
happy nor sad. Think about many people you know and the characteristics of
158 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
their moods, or think about your own affective responses to romantic movies,
comedy shows, or responses to being with someone close to you.
Clinicians need to assess mood and affect for several reasons. Mood and
affect may provide clinicians with necessary information about clients’ primary
diagnoses (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizoaffective disorder), periodic
changes in emotional states secondary to other related problems (e.g., medical
disorders, such as Parkinson’s disease or Lou Gehrig’s disease), co-occurring
problems (mood and medical disorders) or social appropriateness and responsiveness to others. Gaining historical information from clients or significant
others about affect becomes particularly important in understanding the severity or significance of current affective information. Cognitive psychologists and
cognitive-behavioral psychologists pay particular attention to clients’ display of
emotions and self-report of feelings, as they are viewed as cues to identify
changes (or needed changes) in individuals’ thoughts and actions.
Can you think of a time when you found someone close to you crying or
nervous? This affective presentation cued you that something was on your
friend’s mind; perhaps, you asked, “What’s wrong?” Your friend was likely to
share some troubling experience or nervous thoughts about an anticipated
event. Thus, emotions and affect provide us with useful information regularly;
evaluating mood, emotions, feelings, and affect provides rich data for clinicians
as well.
Behavior
In psychology today, behavior is often broadly defined as encompassing all
human activity, whether overt or covert, objective or subjective. Behavior, in its
broadest sense, includes all human experiences and is the focus of clinical psychology. This broad definition, however, is not particularly helpful in structuring data collection for assessment.
Behaviorists (John B. Watson, E. C. Tolman, C. L. Hull, B. F. Skinner) defined behavior as including only objective, observable, overt activity by organisms. In this original sense of the term, sequences of activity or movement, and
patterns of movement characterized behavior. This definition is much more
limiting. Contemporary clinical psychologists who identify themselves as
cognitive-behaviorists, or even as behaviorists, have expanded the term behavior to somewhat of a midpoint between the original definition and the broadest
one. Behavior to these groups of psychologists usually refers to overt and covert
behaviors. Many behaviorists and cognitive-behaviorists will classify physiological events, and thoughts, judgment, or problem solving as covert or internal
behaviors (Cone, 1995; Hayes & Follette, 1993; Linehan as cited in O’Brien
et al., 1999).
For the purpose of clinical assessment, a relatively narrow definition of
behavior is most useful, since cognitions will be assessed as a separate category. (For some variables, the categories may seem arbitrarily separated, but
the distinction is often less important than the acquisition of all the necessary
information.) Behaviors, therefore, are individuals’ objective, observable actions that may or may not be purposeful or intentional. An example of behavior is the posture you are holding while reading this book; both the posture and
the book reading are behaviors. Other examples are nail biting, eating, gazing
Introduction to Assessment 159
off into the distance, smoking, or punching someone. Some behaviors will be
observed by clinicians during the course of an assessment; others will be reported by clients or significant others. Generally speaking, a clinician assumes
a client is properly describing her behavior when she reports that she swims
for exercise; the clinician does not need to view this behavior. (The reliability
of the data regarding frequency may be questionable, but it is likely that the
client and clinician have a mutual understanding of what “swimming” behavior is and is not.) Historical reports of behaviors and reports by others are valued, as described earlier, so that clients’ current behaviors can be understood
in the context of their overall lives (e.g., increase or decrease of frequency, intensity, desire).
Clinicians might inquire about behaviors relating to reported emotions:
What does the client do when he feels angry? Does he throw things? Hit people?
Drink alcohol? Go for a run in the park to release his emotions? Call a friend?
Engage in a different, less anger-provoking activity? Thus, coping behaviors are
important targets of assessment. Other targeted behaviors include health behaviors (e.g., eating habits, exercise, sleeping), unhealthy behaviors (e.g., smoking),
communication behaviors (e.g., verbal and nonverbal activities), interpersonal
behaviors (e.g., sexual activity, social activities), recreational behaviors (e.g.,
movie watching), occupational behaviors (e.g., organizational habits), study behaviors (e.g., daily reviewing of materials).
Cognition
When you have recognized that a friend has made a bad decision, do you ask,
“What were you thinking?” Or maybe you don’t vocalize this question, but
perhaps it runs through your mind! To understand behaviors, problems, and
adaptive functioning, many clinical psychologists rely on the answer to this
question to understand patients’ behaviors and problems. Although some psychologists do not ask direct questions about specific thoughts, cognition is the
core unit of information interpreted by psychologists holding many different
theoretical orientations (see Eels, 1997 for a review).
Cognition, broadly defined, addresses all aspects of information processing: attention, perception, memory, knowledge representations (schemas, imagery), learning (intelligence; achievement; aptitude), cognitive development,
creativity, language, problem solving, decision making, reasoning, and judgment (Sternberg, 1999). Most assessments include a mental status exam, which is
a cursory evaluation (described in more detail later) that allows clinicians to
examine clients’ information-processing abilities to determine if each aspect of
cognitive functioning seems to be intact (within “normal” range). Depending
on which facets of cognition are not intact, clinicians may have to rely on other
sources of information for treatment planning and evaluation, or conduct a
more in-depth assessment that focuses on the troubled area.
In global clinical assessments, clinicians might attempt to answer some of
the following questions: Is the client attentive to questions, responses, and
nonverbal or verbal social cues in session? Does the client exercise good judgment when faced with social or high-risk situations? How effective are the
client’s problem-solving skills when faced with novel or stressful situations?
Does the client engage in rational and systematic approaches to decision mak160 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
ing, or does she make careless or impulsive decisions? What images does the
person associate with his traumatic experience, and when do these images
enter his consciousness (e.g., flashbacks during the day, nightmares)? How accurate or insightful do the person’s observations and appraisals of self and others seem to be?
Psychologists sometimes use the narrowly defined terms cognition and
thought interchangeably. Most clinical psychologists assess clients’ thoughts, but
the interpretations made about these thoughts vary across theoretical perspectives. Cognitive psychologists and cognitive-behavioral psychologists thoroughly examine persons’ automatic thoughts and core beliefs (schemas) about
themselves, others, and the world (A. T. Beck et al., 2004; Persons & Tompkins,
1997). Negative automatic thoughts and dysfunctional core beliefs are thought
to be central, and causally related to interpersonal and intrapersonal problems,
according to cognitive theory (J. Beck, 1995). Assessment of thoughts that occurred before, during, and after problematic situations are elicited.
Some assessment questions dictate a thorough, concentrated evaluation of
specific areas of cognitive functioning. A client may be referred for an assessment of impaired memory. The clinician will need to identify if the client’s
memory problems are due to extreme emotional distress (depression), environmental distractions, or if processing information (making new memories,
retrieving memories) is the problem; treatment recommendations will be predicated on the findings. Perception, defined by cognitive neuroscience, refers to
an individual’s reception of incoming sensory information. A clinician, therefore, may seek to answer questions about a child’s school performance, and the
role an auditory processing problem might play in this difficulty. In these situations, the other target domains become contextual rather than explanatory.
Spiritual beliefs, religious beliefs, and philosophies of life are often categorized as cognitions. Spirituality and religiosity have been defined in various
ways throughout the theological, psychological, and medical literatures. Spirituality is concerned with “the transcendent, addressing ultimate questions about
life’s meaning, with the assumption that there is more to life than what we see
or fully understand. Spirituality can call us beyond self to concern and compassion for others”(John E. Fetzer Institute, 1999, p. 2). Fitchett, Burton, and
Sivan (1997) offers a similar definition, but suggests that spirituality can refer
to activities, in addition to beliefs. Spirituality is sometimes encompassed
within religiosity (John E. Fetzer Institute) and vice versa (Reed, 1987).
Religiosity has been defined as having “specific behavioral, social, doctrinal, and denominational characteristics because it involves a system of worship and doctrine that is shared within a group,” (John E. Fetzer Institute,
1999, p. 2). Fitchett et al. (1997) further suggests that religiosity refers to the
adherence to such behaviors and beliefs. Religion fosters spirituality, but people may also engage in religious behaviors without considering themselves
spiritual, according to the description provided. Some professionals use these
terms interchangeably (Reed, 1987; Fitchett et al., 1997), and others maintain
the distinctions in research and clinical work. The Fetzer Institute working
group has identified several domains of religiousness/spirituality that have
stronger theoretical and empirical connection to health and mental health
outcomes: daily spiritual experiences, meaning, values, beliefs, forgiveness,
Introduction to Assessment 161
private religious practices, religious/spiritual coping, religious support, religious/spiritual history, commitment, organizational religiousness, and religious preference. Each of these domains continues to be investigated, refined,
and objectified into assessment measures to aid research and future clinical
work (John E. Fetzer Institute, 1999). Mindfulness has also become increasingly important in psychologists’ and mental health professionals’ work (J. R.
Martin, 1997; Roth, 1997).
Although spirituality and religiosity had historically been less of a focus
for social, cognitive, and behavioral psychologists (John E. Fetzer Institute,
1999), the past 15 years have seen a change in this orientation among psychologists as a whole (Hafen, Karren, Frandsen, & Smith, 1996; Csikszentmihalyi,
1999; D. W. Sue, Bingham, Porche-Burke, & Vasquez, 1999). The difficulty that
these constructs present is that they are not quantifiable or objectively measurable, other than by the behaviors that may result from these beliefs (which obviously then shifts spirituality or religion to behavior instead of cognition).
How can we quantify who is more spiritual or religious? Is someone who
thinks about greater beings and higher powers more often than another person
necessarily more spiritual or religious? Even if an equation could be derived to
compare people on this construct, would there be any utility in doing so? Religiosity is more easily quantifiable, according to some (organizational religiosity,
public religiosity, private religiosity; George, 1999; Idler, 1987, 1999; Levin,
1999), because it represents the practice of religion (behaviors). However, measurement of spirituality and religiosity is still in its infancy.
Despite the difficulty in measuring and assessing spirituality, mindfulness,
and religiosity for groups of individuals and for comparison of individuals, individual qualitative assessment should be an integral part of every evaluation,
since it is an integral part, or not, of everyone’s life. Once an individual endorses the importance of spirituality or religion in his or her life, assessment of
the impact or incorporation of religion or spirituality across target domains is
most useful.
Biology may be positively affected (low blood pressure) by spiritual practices of meditation or yoga (Patel, 1993). Affect may be regulated or controlled
differently for some than others, as a function of spiritual beliefs. An example
may be the expression of emotions in response to the death of a loved one: Individuals who believe in an afterlife may have an easier time accepting a loss,
than those who do not, and therefore, a difference in affect may be noted. Religion and spirituality may affect individual beliefs about psychological or physical illness, and health and care-seeking behaviors. Jehovah’s Witnesses will not
accept a blood transfusion because of their belief that four passages in the Bible
instruct Witnesses not to consume blood; these passages are interpreted differently by other religious groups. In Chapter 3, we followed the case example of
Doris whose religious fatalism had a notable impact on her health-related behavior. Spirituality and religion may be the focus of individual’s social activities
and support networks, as observed in the case of Doris. Recall how such beliefs
or a person’s philosophy of life influences cultural identity. Physical environment may also be determined partially as a result of a person’s spiritual beliefs
or religious adherence. For example, does your client live in a communal set162 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
ting, such as a kibbutz or Eruv, or a monastery? Has your client taken a vow of
poverty, or does he or she rely on community for living arrangements?
Spirituality and religion are important topic areas to address with all
clients, regardless of the assessment goal or referral question. It is hard to imagine how these variables would not impact clinicians’ and clients’ concern, if the
topics were important to them. Should spirituality and religious beliefs remain
categorized as a construct within cognition (Belar & Deardorff, 1995)? Should
we address spiritual practices and religious behaviors as separate constructs
from cognitions? Or, does it make the most sense to consider these issues
within the context of a person’s social domain? We think the answers to these
questions are “yes!” Classification is less important here, than broad-based assessment. As psychologists establish the empirical relevance of spirituality to
clients’ psychological and physical well-being, perhaps the biopsychosocial systems model will be renamed the “biopsychosocialspiritual systems model.”
Social Environment
Individuals operate within the context of their environments, and among other
people. Bandura’s social learning theory (1977) asserts that individuals influence their environments, and environments influence people in a reciprocal
fashion. Peer pressure and adolescent smoking demonstrate this relationship. If
social circles dictate, “smoking is cool,” adolescents may be more inclined to engage in this habit to “fit in.” However, if the captain of the football team is
revered by peers and decides that drinking and driving is irresponsible, he may
positively influence the social climate of his classmates. Thus, understanding
the social environment within which clients function on a daily basis is critical
to understanding what individual variables may necessitate change (e.g., assertiveness skills), and what aspects of the social environment or which environments are related to clients’ problems (e.g., the recovering alcoholic whose
friends spend most of their free time in bars). Social environments can include
more distal variables such as society’s values and customs (laws, policies, standards) and cultural factors, or personal contexts, such as nuclear and extended
family, friends and acquaintances, religious or community groups, employment
coworkers, superiors and subordinates.
Strengths and weaknesses are equally important to evaluate in clients’ social environments: How has the client’s family responded to her interracial
marriage plans? Will the client’s employer permit him to work at home after
his surgery, or will he have to take extended leave of absence without pay until
he reaches full recovery? Also, past social factors may provide useful information about why a client is experiencing difficulty, despite functioning satisfactorily in the past: Perhaps the child’s parents recently divorced, or his best
friend moved away. An individual with mental retardation in a group home
setting may be fearful of a new caregiver. However, a senior adult might experience improvements in mood as a result of moving to an assisted living environment where she now has competent help and a new network of social
activities.
Cultural factors may be categorized with social environment (Belar &
Deardorff, 1995), although a case could also be made to view cultural factors as
Introduction to Assessment 163
a target domain unto itself. Culture is defined as “(a) the totality of the customs, arts, science, and religious and political behavior taken as an integrated
whole that distinguishes one society from another; (b) A society or group of
persons whose customs, arts, and so on, set them apart from another group; (c)
The intellectual and artistic aspects of life as opposed to the purely material or
technical” aspects of life (Chaplin, 1985, p. 113).
Much like spirituality and religion, culture permeates individuals’ cognitions, behaviors, and social interactions, view of “appropriate” affect, living
arrangements and sense of personal identity. Culture is different from the constructs of religion and spirituality, however, in that everyone has multiple cultural affiliations. Culture can refer to the norms and values that individuals
identify with, based on their heritage (e.g., Latino culture), religion (Jewish
culture), sexual orientation (gay, lesbian, or transsexual culture), mainstream
society, or other factors that establish the identity of a people. Culture can be
evaluated within a country (Western civilization), a geographic region (“down
South”), family, or other cohort. Occupational environments, schools, and even
programs within schools, have their own culture. Culture can be assessed at the
individual level, molar level of society, molecular level of the person, or varying overlapping levels of each (Brofenbremmer, 1994).
Too often, beginning clinical psychology graduate students, when asked,
will respond that their client has “no cultural variables to consider.” How does
this translate? The student perceives that “the client’s culture is the same as
mine,” or “the client’s culture is that of the majority in the local society; the
client is a 35-year-old, middle-class, Caucasian male.” Beginning clinicians are
cautioned not to assume likeness or differences. Assessing an individual’s culture at various levels is critical to completion of a comprehensive, broad-based
assessment. It is also an ethical obligation (APA, 2003, 9.02b, 9.02c, 9.06).
What information can be gleaned from even the basic description provided? If
not answers, certainly many questions arise: What are the expectations of 35-
year-old men in the client’s family, religious group, or social class? Are young
men expected to work 5 days a week, marry, and raise a family? Earn a certain
living? How have the expectations set by cultural norms affected his view of
himself, others, and the world? How have cultural norms affected his behaviors? Which of these cultural affiliations and its norms are most salient to the
problem of interest? All these questions, and many others, are important to understanding systemic influences on your client’s cognitions, behaviors, affect,
and physical and social environments. Thus, clinicians are charged with the
mission of understanding the cultural norms of the society in which the client
lives, and the social, occupational, and familial environments within which he
or she functions.
Cultural norms are defined as “a standard or set of standards in a given culture derived from the behavior of the generality of the individual members of
that culture; an ordinarily expectable behavioral manifestation or pattern,
against which an individual’s behavior is judged” (Chaplin, 1985, p. 113).
Given this definition, clinicians could have several judgments to make: How
has the cultural values of this client affected (positively, negatively, or neutrally) his or her cognitions, behaviors, affect, and social or physical environments? Is the client’s behavior normal within his or her own cultural norms,
164 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
and how does the client’s behavior compare with the cultural norms dictated by
mainstream society? Is the client caught between two cultures, and experiencing difficulty with the hybrid values? Perhaps the client’s functioning is not
maladaptive or pathological from the viewpoint of his or her own culture, but
in the mainstream culture, the person’s behavior is unacceptable.
The DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) has devised a
special task force to look specifically at the impact of cultural variables on
psychopathology. Readers are encouraged to review the DSM-IV-TR for further
discussion of the current issues.
Physical Environment
Clinicians most often conduct assessments in inpatient or outpatient settings,
and less often in clients’ home or work environments. In such instances, we
seldom know much about clients’ living arrangements, living conditions, or
neighborhood, unless we ask. Likewise, gathering information about a client’s
work environment, treating hospital or physician’s office environment, or
school setting may provide critical data necessary to understand a client’s problems or to devise treatment plans to resolve them. Without this information,
even the seemingly best advice may be contraindicated.
In treating a 38-year-old woman for an obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) that led her to check and recheck her locks on her windows, skylights,
and doors, and her electric outlets constantly, the empirically supported treatment for OCD (Foa & Kozak, 1997; Kozak & Foa, 1997) requires the OCD client
to be exposed to the stressor or stimuli (unlocked windows), while inhibiting
the typical response (checking and locking them). The mechanism of action is
that the client’s anxiety peaks and then reduces as she increases her tolerance
to the situation and recognizes that the anticipated negative outcome will not
result. However, this woman was a recovered drug addict who had worked very
hard to earn her rent for her row house in a section of the city that was known
to have a high crime rate and rough inhabitants. Leaving her windows unlocked could pose an actual danger to her child and herself.
Understanding the physical environment surrounding this client’s residence aided in understanding a potential contributing factor to her development and maintenance of extreme fear of losing her tangible possessions. Also,
gaining a historical perspective of this client’s physical environment shed light
on important aspects of her presenting problem. She had a 6-year history of
heroin drug use and had never kept any possessions because she had sold
everything she owned for drugs, including her body (prostitution). Now that
she was clean and sober, had joined a welfare-to-work program, and was pursuing her undergraduate degree, she had too much invested to have her possessions taken from her. In addition to brainstorming ways in which she might
change her living arrangements, exposure and response prevention exercises
were first directed at “safer” targets, such as leaving her empty car unlocked
with the windows cracked, plugging a lamp into an outlet in the wall and leaving it plugged in while she left the room, and learning other techniques to reduce the frequency of her checking behaviors.
A newly married Vietnamese couple came into therapy because their
sex life seemed to come to a halt after returning from their honeymoon.
Introduction to Assessment 165
Apparently, the couple had no sexual difficulties prior to marriage, and therefore, the husband was particularly disturbed by the sudden change. He made
many attributions about himself and their marriage, before a thorough assessment uncovered one of the predominant problematic factors; once married,
the couple moved into the wife’s family’s house. Prior to marriage, sex occurred most often at the husband’s apartment. A thorough assessment revealed that the couple’s bedroom was next door to the bedroom of the wife’s
parents. This was particularly problematic for the wife, because she was
afraid her parents would hear their sexual activity at night. Identifying the
physical environment in which the problem occurred helped to identify the
wife’s cognitions that were negatively impacting the couple’s sexual behavior.
The wife had difficulty accepting that her parents now “knew” she was having
sex with her husband, and she irrationally feared that their views of her
would negatively change. Additional examples in which the physical environment may contribute to, contextualize, maintain, or provide change for
identified problems are many.
Summary
Understanding people, their problems, and their way of functioning requires
clinicians to conduct a multifaceted assessment. The biopsychosocial systems
model, based in social learning theory, acceptance of the mind-body connection, and evaluation of people and systems at various levels, provides a framework for this investigation. Clinicians are encouraged to assess individual
variables (biology, affect, cognition, behavior, culture, spirituality/religion/philosophy of life), social variables (family and significant others, acquaintances,
work-affiliated persons, community groups, culture, spirituality/religion
adopted by significant others, etc.), and physical environment variables (living,
work, and social environments). Historical, current, and potential future conditions should be explored to maximize the utility of the information gained.
166 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
167



Chapter 6 prepared you to think about the types of assessment clinical psychologists conduct and the biopsychosocial systems approach to assessment. A goal-oriented approach to decision making begins the process of
assessment preparation. This chapter focuses on structuring the assessor’s critical thinking to be the best consumer of available information. Using the scientific method to approach assessment gears the clinician toward hypothesis
testing, taking an operational approach to targeted domains, and using a multimodal, multimethod, time-series assessment, as appropriate. The use and integration of the psychological assessment tools (clinical interviews, psychological
testing, observation, report of significant others, report of other professionals,
and self-report measures) are discussed.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Explain the scientific method.
• Describe how the scientific method applies to the clinical practice of assessment.
• Define at least three heuristics and biases and explain how they impact the
assessment process.
• Discuss the importance and use of multimodal, multimethod, time-series
assessments.
168 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
• Describe the importance of validity and reliability of assessment tools for
clinical planning.
• Explain the pros and cons, and differences, among at least 5 assessment
tools for gathering data.
In the previous chapters, you learned about the historical routes of
cognitive-behavioral therapies, the emphasis on empirically supported approaches to therapy, and the value of research and its contributions to clinical
psychology. For the most part, these discussions focused on groups of people,
according to classification systems and categorization. Focusing on individual
clients poses particular challenges because of the uniqueness and variability in
people’s biology, affect, cognition, behaviors, social systems, and physical environments. How, then, do cognitive-behavioral clinical psychologists gather
useful information about all these different factors? How do we know if this
information is accurate, reliable, and valid? How does this approach differ
from data collection techniques used by other noncognitive-behavioral psychologists? This chapter provides the answers to these and similar questions.
The Scientific Method
Cognitive-behavioral psychologists adopt a scientific approach to assessment
and treatment. The scientific method dictates that inquiry begins with a research
(clinical) question that leads to a hypothesis, or educated guess, regarding the
answer to the question. The hypothesis is operationally defined in clear, objective, measurable constructs or terms. Data is gathered to test the hypothesis,
and then it is analyzed to evaluate if the hypothesis is supported or not supported. Cognitive-behavioral psychologists would argue that the assessment
process, and psychology as a whole, for that matter, operates according to these
scientific principles.
Most clinical hypotheses are works-in-progress and are revised frequently
to reflect acquisition of new data or changes in the client’s circumstances, behaviors, or other information. Thus, according to a cognitive-behavioral assessment
paradigm, hypotheses and assessments are dynamic. Likewise, psychologists’ approaches to assessments must be flexible to accommodate new research, technology, and knowledge about adaptive and maladaptive human behavior.
Biases in Assessment
Hypotheses need to be flexible and dynamic, but so do the clinicians who propose them. Clinicians must be aware of their own tendencies and biases to conduct searches that only lead to support for their initial hunches. By this, we
mean that it is critical for clinicians to seek information that could potentially
disconfirm their hypotheses. Once a clinician is informed that her client, J. R., is
often “impatient,” according to his wife’s report (or his own), the clinician may
be primed to recognize all his behaviors as confirming evidence of his impatience: fidgeting in the waiting room, shifting in his chair, frequent watch checking. Without further inquiry, the clinician may make inaccurate judgments
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 169
based on these behaviors and believe that her initial assumption about this person holds true. Clinicians’ must always ask themselves, what else could explain
these behaviors, or what else might these behaviors signify? Proper assessment
of alternative hypotheses is required to ensure the accuracy of the clinician’s hypotheses. In the case of J. R., what else could account for his behaviors—possibly an attention disorder, anxiety, or physical discomfort from arthritis? Maybe
this client is attending the therapy session on his lunch hour and is afraid he will
be late in returning to work. Is it possible that he really needs to find the men’s
room, but lacks assertiveness skills to interrupt the therapy session? “Sometimes
a cigar is just a cigar,” but clinicians need to thoroughly examine their data to be
sure that this is the case.
Although you might like to think that you would have considered many
of the possible explanations for J. R.’s behavior, early research suggests that
most people would not. Herbert Simon argued that most people use heuristics
(mental shortcuts) in decision making, and do not tend to consider all available
explanations or solutions to a problem. Most people will stop searching when
they find a solution that is “good enough,” or generally satisfying; most people
will not seek out the best solution available.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahnemann (1974), followed Simon’s work,
and furthered research in this area. Surprisingly, they found that people generally had greater tendencies to use shortcuts in decision making, than tendencies
toward rational and systematic decision making based on complete information
and comprehensive strategies. Don’t we all always look for the easiest route to
get somewhere, or the most efficient means to get something done? Of course
we do. These heuristics often lead to errors in judgment. Based on knowledge
gained from experimental cognitive psychology research, A. M. Nezu and Nezu
(1989) point out that most clinicians are also likely to make these judgmental
errors in their clinical work.
We would like to think that you strive to be better than most people, and
therefore, learning about common heuristics and biases that influence clinical
decision making will alert you to choose assessment strategies that minimize
biases and maximize collection, use, and interpretation of truthful, verifiable
clinical information. Furthermore, adopting a problem-solving approach to
clinical decision making (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997),
described later, will provide you with a framework to maintain cognizance of
this process. The problem-solving model for clinical decision making discusses
the assessment and treatment paradigm (theoretical orientation), biases, and
heuristics as part of the clinician’s worldview (A. M. Nezu et al., 1997), or the
way clinicians understand and conceptualize patients’ problems and human behavior, in general.
Common Heuristics
You take many mental shortcuts every day. How many times have you
attempted to finish people’s sentences for them? Perhaps, you skimmed
this morning’s newspaper, and thought you got the gist of the article, only
to find out you overlooked the punch line. These shortcuts do not have grave
consequences in your day-to-day activities, but the following heuristics might
have a greater impact on your clients, and your clinical decision making about
them.
170 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
The representative heuristic, anchoring heuristic, and availability heuristic
are three shortcuts identified by Tversky and Kahnemann (1974) that people
use to assess probabilities and predict outcomes to simple judgments. Often,
these heuristics work when we use past experiences and patterns to make judgments about current events and situations, but there are also many opportunities for these shortcuts to be inaccurate. These judgments may be inaccurate
when people only rely on their own experiences or stories they have learned,
and disregard or do not consider the prevalence of situations or events as they
occur in the general population. We tend to do this when it fits our needs, even
though we may not realize it. A 38-year-old man who is told repeatedly to quit
smoking may retort by exclaiming that his 90-year-old grandmother has
smoked two packs of cigarettes a day for the past 60 years. Why should he believe his health is at risk by this behavior?
The representative heuristic suggests that people attempt to assess probabilities based on the degree of likeness between the current object or stimuli
and a previously developed concept or established stimuli. Essentially, decisions are made based on how much “A” resembles “B.” If asked to guess the
profession of an older woman who wears conservative clothes, her hair in a
bun, and square reading glasses hung on a metal chain, you are more likely to
classify her as a librarian than as a volleyball coach. How often have you seen a
muscular, thin, and fit person and assumed he or she must exercise a lot or be
athletic? Others make the judgment that “women who are very thin must not
eat.” We can all think of people who fit these descriptions accurately, and many
people who do not if we push ourselves to consider fitting examples, and ones
to the contrary. You might be thinking, “How is this different from stereotyping?” If you are, then you are thinking along the right track. Stereotypes are
built on heuristics; fitting someone into that stereotype, then might be an example of the representative bias.
The representative heuristic is related to the concept of schemas, which
should be familiar to you based on your undergraduate course in cognition,
and our discussions in this book. Applied here, people have an associated
framework or mental set (schema) within which to consider incoming information. Thinking about a visit to a psychologist’s office should activate the schema
that represents this notion: an academic office, or perhaps, a clinical outpatient
setting. In assessment, errors in thinking occur when a schema is accessed to
the exclusion of other schemas. A clinician may inappropriately only think of
anorexia as a diagnosis when assessing an underweight adolescent female, and
therefore, does not conduct a thorough evaluation of other target areas of the
patient’s life. Or a clinician may assume that a 75-year-old female patient who
is obstinate with interpersonal difficulties is experiencing cognitive decline or
dementia, when in fact, the patient may have a history of behavior consistent
with borderline personality disorder (Nutkowitz, unpublished manuscript).
One way to correct this error in judgment is to remember the importance of always going outside and beyond what you “intuitively know” or what you think
is occurring, and look for disconfirming evidence or alternative hypotheses.
The anchoring heuristic (Tversky & Kahnemann, 1974) is a shortcut
method of estimation or prediction, involving situations in which final decisions are based more on initial impressions than on subsequent information.
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 171
Yes, your mother was right. You had better make a good first impression, because research shows that these impressions are lasting. Although therapists
would like to think their clinical decisions are solely based on facts gained from
their skilled inquisition or observations, we are all at risk for biasing our judgments with first impressions unless we guard against these tendencies.
Consider the following scenario in which a seemingly timid, polite and
proper, well-dressed female client, Wilma, describes her husband in the context of her distress over their marital problems. She tells you that her husband
Roger is insensitive, does not listen to her, and is disrespectful. With further
prompting, Wilma describes several situations in which Roger tells Wilma her
work-related problems are her fault, walks out of the room in the midst of conversations, and embarrasses her in public by apologizing for comments she
makes. Given that Wilma seems quite accommodating and pleasant, how do
you feel about Roger and his treatment of Wilma? The clinician who is aware of
biases and judgmental errors wants to gather additional information, and consider alternative hypotheses so Roger is invited to attend the next session.
When Roger accompanies Wilma, you suddenly learn new information.
This “timid, polite and proper” woman hollers and curses at Roger constantly,
seemingly without provocation. He reports that she is critical and insulting to
him, and does not allow any flaw to go unnoticed. What you now learn is that
Roger’s tendency to walk out of a room, or quiet her in public places are his
coping strategies to deal with her maltreatment. Now what are you thinking?
The anchoring heuristic might have allowed the clinician to continue to think
of Roger as an insensitive, nasty husband, instead of considering his behaviors
as coping strategies. Wilma’s therapy would have taken a very different path if
the new information was not obtained or considered in the formulation or
analysis of the couple’s relationship.
To minimize the potential for the anchoring heuristic to cause judgmental
errors in assessment and therapy, therapists must systematically consider all
data gathered over the course of time, not just in the initial intake. Thus, the
scientific approach to clinical assessment requires time-series or ongoing assessment (Haynes, 1998). Gaining information from multiple sources also helps
contain the tendency to jump to conclusions. Other stimuli that might be red
flags for new clinicians include first impressions of clients with diverse backgrounds or differences from the clinician. As stated, most people make initial
judgments about everyone they encounter; consider how these heuristics may
bias your evaluation of persons with various ethnic, gender, age, sexual orientation, or other cultural features that are different from your own. Or even
more likely, consider how the representative or anchoring heuristics might bias
your evaluation of persons you assume are similar to you!
The availability heuristic, another judgmental error identified by Tversky
and Kahnemann (1974), describes people’s tendency to use readily recalled
information, examples, or instances as the basis for estimating the frequency
or probability of an event. The salience and recentness of events tend to affect
availability estimates and the likelihood of making a judgmental error of this
type.
A classic example of the availability heuristic is the “medical school syndrome.” One day in class, students learn about a rare medical phenomenon that
172 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
presents with a multitude of symptoms. Alone, these symptoms are common,
but in combination they are potentially fatal. Later that evening, a student experiences a symptom similar to what was discussed in class earlier that day. He
then becomes 100% certain that he has the disease under study because the
first explanation that comes to mind is what was discussed in class. Learning
about illnesses puts this information in the forefront of students’ minds. Psychology students are also prone to this syndrome. During your psychopathology class, be sure to count how many behaviors you have displayed that are
consistent with various diagnoses. Chances are, for most of the criteria, you
can think about information that is inconsistent with your current line of
thinking, and you will be disregarding information that does not fit the criteria
you are examining.
The availability heuristic may influence clinicians’ thinking in various
stages of assessment and treatment. Suppose a new psychology student, Mary,
has three sessions to test and diagnose a woman who claims she is having trouble concentrating due to racing thoughts. In the first meeting with her, the
client spends the first 15 minutes crying about the recent loss of her pet and the
student has trouble comforting her. Since Mary was not expecting this interaction to be filled with intense emotions, it will likely leave a lasting impression
on her, even if the rest of the two-hour session is particularly uneventful.
Mary’s day became very busy, and she forgot to write her progress note. When
she remembers to do so on the next day, she emphasizes how emotional this
client was throughout the session. This inaccuracy in recall would likely be due to
the availability heuristic. The saliency of Mary’s own discomfort in this experience led her to make an error in her judgment and recall.
Other Biases
A. M. Nezu and Nezu (1989) discuss several other judgmental errors that can
occur in clinical work if proper measures are not taken to prevent them. Such
errors can result from biased search strategies, overconfidence, and causal attributions. None of these terms are likely to be unfamiliar to you but discussion of
the application of these concepts to clinical decision making is critical for new
and even senior clinicians.
Each assessment you conduct and every therapy session you provide will
require you to evaluate many aspects of your client, the session, and your
work. You need to determine the status of your client’s improvement in chief
complaints and responsiveness to treatment in each session. Biased search
strategies lead clinicians to falsely confirm their hypotheses about their clients’
diagnoses, case formulations, progress, receptiveness to treatment, or other
hypotheses as a result of only gathering or searching for information or only
using search strategies, instruments, or tools, that are consistent with one’s
way of thinking, and excluding or disregarding search tools or information that
could potentially disconfirm hypotheses. Selective attention, or only paying attention to cues or information consistent with one’s way of thinking, may be
considered a part of biased search strategy errors.
Consider, for a moment, the last courtroom drama you saw. The attorneys inevitably have a position to defend, and the questions asked of the witnesses they bring forward are directive and closed-ended; “Mrs. Xavier, isn’t it
true that you placed your brother in a psychiatric institute so that you could
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 173
take all of his money?” Now, this example may be a bit extreme in clinical psychology, but not by far. Closed-ended and leading questions do not allow disconfirming evidence to surface easily. “Mr. Marcos, you look a lot better than
the last time I saw you. The relaxation techniques must be working, aren’t
they?” By asking this question, the clinician may not come to know that Mr.
Marcos just returned from a week’s vacation in Puerto Rico, where he had no
work or family responsibilities, and slept more hours than usual—without
practicing his techniques at all. However, is he likely to admit this when he is
receiving such praise? Possibly, but possibly not! Biased search strategies can
be avoided by conducting broad-based assessments, covering areas that seem
particularly relevant, and others that may not initially seem important from
the clinician’s point of view. Seeking alternative explanations for targets of interest is also critical.
Errors in clinical decision making about any aspect of assessment, case
conceptualization, treatment, or discharge can also result from clinicians’ overconfidence. Even the most seasoned clinician should adhere to the systematic
and scientific techniques proposed in this chapter, because senior clinicians just
like newly trained clinicians are liable to make errors in clinical work if they are
not careful. Specifically, A. M. Nezu and Nezu (1989) suggest that being overconfident about one’s knowledge can lead to sloppiness or errors in clinical reasoning. Clinicians who think their expertise is superior may engage in biased
search strategies (looking for reinforcements or supporting evidence that they
are great clinicians or researchers), or engage in other judgmental errors, such
as overlooking the need for peer consultation due to inaccurately perceiving
their ability to work with certain complex or difficult patients. An overconfident clinician may be subject to the representative heuristic by misattributing
his competence; “I treated the last patient with anger management problems
successfully so I think this patient will be similarly easy.”
Everyone is susceptible to engaging in errors in reasoning, or biases in
thinking for many reasons. An overarching bias that all clinicians maintain is
that of their own theoretical orientation. The belief systems adopted by clinicians are based on some empirical research, theories, and assumptions (our biases are showing), that are not based entirely in verifiable truth. Belief systems,
or “worldviews” (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997), lead clinicians to make causal attributions about patients’ behaviors according to their
theoretical perspective, which may neglect other important contributing factors. A cognitive psychologist may only examine cognitions to explain why a
client is depressed. If the clinician neglects to send the client for a medical examination to rule out biological factors, and this client’s problem stems from a
thyroid condition, he may be wrongly treated.
As you have been reading this section on heuristics and biases, some of
the examples and scenarios may seem obvious or extreme. In daily practice,
when clinicians do not have the luxury of metacognition (thinking about the
way they think), such errors in judgment may occur more frequently than any
of us would like to believe. Perhaps this itself is a self-protecting bias. The next
section expands on the methods, strategies, and scientific techniques provided
to minimize use of faulty heuristics and biases, and an overall assessment paradigm that will improve the accuracy of our clinical evaluations, judgments,
and decisions.
174 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
A Closer Look at a Scientific Approach to Assessment
A scientific approach to assessment, largely based in the behavioral assessment
paradigm (Haynes, 1998), emphasizes, “Empirically based, multimethod, multimodal, and multiinformant measurement of lower-level, precisely specified,
observable behavior and contemporaneous causal variables. The paradigm emphasizes the application of well-validated minimally inferential assessment instruments, applied in a time-series format” (p. 2). That is one quote you would
do well to memorize (once you understand the terminology, of course). The
remainder of this section explains what Haynes, and other colleagues who
contributed to the development of this paradigm (see Haynes, 1998, for additional references), meant by this statement, and why we advocate for following this model.
Following the biopsychosocial systems model, clinicians should use multiple methods (multimethod) to assess clients’ strengths and weaknesses, problems,
and supports. Examples of methods that might be used include interviews, observations, computerized assessments, physiological measurements, self-report
inventories, and other techniques. The key is that one method alone may not
capture the full picture of what you are trying to assess. Someone who does not
appear anxious may still have an accelerated heart rate that is detected by physiological measurement, when led to think about perceived threatening situations.
Thus, relying on observation alone would not provide sufficient information
about the client’s reduction of anxiety during treatment.
A multimodal assessment requires assessment of motor behaviors; verbal
behaviors, expressions, or statements; biological factors; affective responses;
and cognitive processes. In Chapter 6, the biopsychosocial systems model was
discussed. You should already be prepared to understand this concept.
In an ideal world, clients come to therapy fully knowing and understanding their problems and how these problems manifest themselves (behaviors, affect, etc.), and therefore, their report about their problems provides accurate
and complete information. In the real world, many clients lack insight about
their problems and have altered perceptions of their own contributions to the
problems, or how others are affected. Information from the perspectives of the
client’s peers, parents, significant others, bosses, and teachers, contributes
enormously to a truly comprehensive picture of the client’s life problems,
strengths and weaknesses, and interpersonal relationships. Data from multiple
informants (multiinformant assessment) provides a context for information
gained directly from clients. Of course, clients’ informed consent is always required prior to contacting these additional persons.
Lower-level variables require clinicians to go beyond diagnoses or theoretical constructs that are general in many ways, to exactly specify the target of assessment or change. If someone is “depressed,” your overall goal might be to
decrease depression. However, just knowing someone is depressed does not
help you to know what you are evaluating. Does the person have thoughts that
she will “never meet a partner?” Is she able to go to work or enjoy activities she
previously enjoyed? Does she have poor problem-solving skills? Identifying
lower-level variables requires clinicians to become more specific in their assessment so that they can understand the client’s problems. The goal is to find out
what the manifestations of depression are for this particular person, and what
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 175
the contributing and maintaining variables of these depressed features might
be. Identifying the lower levels of the problem also will allow treatment planning to be more focused.
In accomplishing the identification of lower-level variables, cognitive, behavioral, and cognitive-behavioral clinicians focus on behaviors (overt or
covert) rather than on traits. That is, they focus on what people do, versus who
they are. To help you recognize the difference, take a moment to recall your
three-sentence description of your best friend. Most people offer descriptions
such as, “My friend is fun to be around. S/he is loyal. My best friend is dependable.” These statements represent characteristics or traits of your friend; they are
general statements. Now think about how you came to these conclusions.
Chances are, you arrived at these characteristics by engaging in three steps: you
observed or experienced your friend’s behaviors; summarized and labeled these
behaviors; and inferred that what he or she does because of these traits. Relying
on inferences in clinical assessment and therapy can result in problems we have
already discussed—heuristics and judgmental biases. Therefore, clinicians are
encouraged to assess measurable constructs or variables whenever possible.
When traits and characteristics are discovered through personality testing, clinicians would do well to explore these findings further to arrive at the lowerlevel variables related to these features. Identifying what people do, broadly
defined, rather than who they are, will enable determination of specific assessment and treatment goals.
Precisely specified variables are concrete and, according to behaviorists, objective. Although objectivity is not always possible in clinical assessment (e.g.,
pain cannot be objectively measured), minimizing ambiguity about persons’
problems and behaviors usually is possible. Operational definitions aid in minimizing ambiguity as information is shared among professionals and between
professionals and clients. Operational definitions are discussed in detail later in
this chapter.
True behavioral assessment focuses only on what a human objectively
sees; thus, the paradigm calls for observable behaviors. Cognitive and cognitivebehavioral therapists have often expanded their assessment to cognitions as
well. Our earlier discussion of the biopsychosocial systems model elaborated
this point. Our bias is that assessment and treatment should not be focused on
hypothesized intrapsychic factors, but on operational, precisely specified overt
or covert (cognitions) behaviors. Recall our behavioral example of someone
doing something; a person (you) sitting in a chair (behavior), reading this book
(behavior). Now add to that observation, the cognitive behavior of learning
(concentrating, recalling, abstracting) and evaluating (this textbook is really interesting!). These are all potentially observable behaviors, if you know the
proper methods of observation.
Furthermore, focusing on contemporaneous events—current events, thoughts,
behaviors, and feelings that are happening in the relative moment—yields more
useful targets in assessment and therapy than historical events. Historical information may provide understanding about the etiology of patients’ problems,
distal contributing factors to the presenting problem, and a context for understanding patterns of behaviors. All this information is deemed important to case
conceptualization; history, however, cannot be changed, but how one thinks and
feels about it can be. Historical information may be pertinent or even critical, but
176 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
how someone is thinking, feeling, and behaving currently as a result of a historical occurrence or about a historical event should be the foci of attention and the
targets for change.
Because this model of assessment supposes that (a) behaviors, thoughts,
and feelings are ever-changing, (b) contemporaneous variables should be targeted, and (c) assessment is dynamic, clinicians ascribing to this model should
conduct time-series assessments. Basically, what you know about a client today
may not be true next week, and therefore, one assessment does not provide a
lifetime of answers, but rather a peek through a keyhole revealing what is
going on at the moment. The adolescent girl, who “hated” her mom last week,
may have been over it a few days later. You might be misguided to assume that
you should pick up where you left off, without a review of the past week’s session and a request for an update.
Most clinicians begin their sessions asking how the client is currently feeling (more specifically, how depressed are they? How anxious have they been in
the past day/week? etc.). The behavioral assessment paradigm suggests an even
more systematic approach to monitoring patients’ symptoms and behaviors. Information gathered only at one point in time may lead to erroneous practices
and judgments for many reasons. Consider our earlier example of the client who
was distraught over her dog’s death. She is not necessarily always tearful and
weepy, but the clinician will only know this if assessment occurs repeatedly over
time. Repeated measurement ensures that the behaviors (thoughts/cognitions,
feelings, etc.) assessed in the first meeting are consistent and representative of
the person, rather than a rare occurrence. Time-series assessments may be accomplished through self-report diaries between sessions, brief assessments at
the beginning of each assessment session, and so on. Once therapy has begun,
ongoing assessment must continue to monitor changes resulting from the intervention or other factors. Without ongoing assessment, clinicians are unlikely to
know if clients are compliant, if treatment is effective, or if other major concerns arise.
Now you have a better idea of what it means to build an assessment on
“empirically based, multimethod, multimodal, and multiinformant measurement of lower-level, precisely specified, observable behavior and contemporaneous causal variables” (Haynes, 1998, p. 2), with assessment occurring over
time. The next section describes what is meant by, “the application of wellvalidated minimally inferential assessment instruments” (Haynes, 1998, p. 2).
Reliability and validity are critical issues to assessment, and other aspects of
clinical psychology, such as research, test construction, and program evaluation. These core concepts, therefore, warrant in-depth discussion.
Reliability, and Validity
Clinicians who maintain a scientific approach to assessment and treatment
gather data by using tools and techniques that are strategically selected for their
psychometric properties. Specifically, cognitive-behavioral psychologists strive
to obtain information with reliable and valid tools and techniques. This is not to
suggest that noncognitive-behavioral psychologists prefer to use unreliable and
invalid methods; however, the degree of emphasis on developing and using
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 177
techniques with known psychometric properties varies across theoretical orientations (see Eels, 1997, for comparisons). Clinicians ideally determine the reliability and validity of psychological instruments and measures prior to using
them to maximize the likelihood that the data they gather are meaningful.
Some instruments require periodic checks to ensure these qualities are maintained over time.
Operational Definitions
An “operational definition” is defined as “(a) the procedures or measures that
are used to define a construct; (b) a definition of a construct in terms of the operations used to produce and measure it” (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993). Use
of operational definitions minimizes inferences made by clinicians or by others
using information obtained from an assessment. They are important for various
aspects of assessment: understanding the variables being evaluated, understanding the intended use of particular psychological instruments, defining
“target behaviors,” interpreting results or collected information, and communicating results to others.
If you provided a clinical assessment report to another therapist and simply stated that the client, Molly, has “difficulty relating to others, specifically
people who remind her of her mother,” will the other therapist know what you
mean? What does “relating,” mean? Is the client incapable of making friendships, holding conversations, cognitively understanding and interpreting verbal
and nonverbal information? And which characteristics of her mother are important in differentiating between people who are “like her mother” and “unlike her mother?” Operational definitions of the terms difficulty, and relating,
and descriptions of the characteristics about “mother,” would allow you to perform more precise and accurate data collection and provide a more useful report of the information you obtain.
As a guiding rule, an operational definition needs to be specific enough to
allow two skilled or trained people to observe the same behavior or construct
and obtain the same results. “Difficulty,” for Molly, therefore, may be defined
as her “uncontrolled thoughts about others’ perception of her, increased sweating and flushing in interactions involving only her and one other person in direct conversation, and induced stuttering when asked direct personal
questions.” More precision in definitions of “relating,” and “remind her of her
mother” would also be required.
Understanding what a client means when he reports feelings of “sadness”
may also require an operational definition to foster clearer understanding between the clinician and the client. A clinician’s definition of “sadness” may be
different from that of the client. To monitor the increase or decrease of sadness
in a client, an operational definition must be created. The client might operationally define sadness as exhibiting tearfulness or absence of smiles, feeling
“alone,” and “empty.” If the clinician does not satisfactorily understand this
definition, he might ask for an objective definition, “If you are feeling sad,
what would an observer see?” Also, a clinician may ask a client to quantify the
severity or intensity of his sadness by rating his feeling on a scale of 1 (absence
of sadness) through 10 (most intense sadness). Using this subjective rating
scale will allow the clinician to assess whether the client’s sadness improves or
178 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
worsens over time, according to his own report. These are just a few ways that
cognitive-behavioral psychologists attempt to increase precision in their own
understanding of clients’ problems using scientific, concrete, objective methods. Operational definitions are critical to ensuring accuracy in assessing and
reporting human behavior; they also are essential to establishing reliability
and validity of assessment tools and data.
Reliability
Reliability is another criterion for selecting useful assessment measures and
techniques. The APA Ethics Code (APA, 2002, 9.02a, 9.02b) states that psychologists use assessments in the manner supporting research deems appropriate,
valid, and reliable for the population being tested. The concept of reliability is
often referred to in discussions of measurement in general, and specifically in
clinical assessment and research. Reliability of tests and instruments refers to
how accurate or free from error a tool is with regard to measurement. A reliable assessment technique or measurement will almost always produce the
same data according to a gold standard. Every time a 5-pound weight is put on
a scale, the scale should read “5 pounds.”
Precision and exactness is necessary to have reliability, but unique to reliability is the idea that data gained from a particular technique or instrument
will be consistent over time or across observations or people. A measurement tool
or instrument can be reliable but not valid. Your bathroom scale can reliably
over- or underestimate your weight, meaning that if your scale tells you that
you weigh 150 pounds, and you measure 150 pounds each time you stand on it
(assuming you have not gained or lost any weight), your scale is said to be reliable. However, your scale could overvalue your weight by 20 pounds, according to your physician’s scale, which was calibrated by standardized weights and
measures. If this were the case, your bathroom scale would be reliable but not
accurate. Note, however, that measures cannot be consistently accurate and not
reliable—give that some thought!
It is important for you to know if a test is reliable. Otherwise, any changes
detected over time will be difficult to interpret. Are changes in scores due to
change in the behavior or trait of the person, or due to the inconsistency of the
measure? Are changes due to measurement error such as instrument calibration? Or are changes due to error in the measurement technique? Clinicians
and researchers need to predict the answer to these questions based on their
measurement selection.
Several common types of reliability are considered in test construction
and selection of assessment measures (Kazdin, 2003). Test-retest reliability describes tests with temporal stability; tests with high test-retest reliability show little interference by influence of everyday life, and reveal consistent scores over
a specified elapsed time frame. We would expect that one’s IQ (intelligence
quotient) or GRE scores would have high test-retest reliability over a onemonth time frame, assuming no formal instruction was provided in the interim. In contrast, we would not expect, nor want an anxiety measure to have
temporal stability. Thus, test-retest reliability, in part, refers to the measure’s
ability to detect differences over time, and also depends on the construct’s stability over time (i.e., humor trait versus anger state). Alternate-form reliability
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 179
describes the consistency between two forms of a test measuring the same construct by use of a similar set of items. Standardized tests should possess this
psychometric property since the different versions of the test, administered at
different times across students or within one administration, usually contain
different questions. (Perhaps you remember getting either pink or yellow test
booklets, depending on which row you sat in during one of your undergraduate
class exams.)
Internal consistency represents a similar concept to alternate-form reliability. However, this form of reliability refers to the consistency within one test.
So, if an exam had 100 questions, these 100 items should statistically show
positive relationships among them. Interrater reliability refers to the consistency
between two or more persons scoring a test, interview, or other stimuli, or
recording or classifying observations, where some subjectivity could conceivably interfere with the results. If you and your classmate both interviewed 10
clients today, interrater reliability would tell you how consistent you are in diagnosing clients using the DSM-IV-TR. Interrater reliability is often achieved by
training, practice, and reevaluation of raters’ performance. Interrater reliability
is especially important in behavioral assessment and evaluations of research
treatment protocols, and in establishing clinicians’ ability to use certain semistructured interviews and clinician-rated or report-by-other measures.
Special types of correlation coefficients are used to evaluate reliability statistically, and most psychometrically sound tests will report these reliability coefficients to allow consumers to determine if the test is reliable for their intended
use. Some tests that are used include the Kuder-Richardson test and coefficient
alpha (internal consistency), kappa (interrater reliability), and Pearson productmoment correlations (test-retest reliability, interrater reliability). Further discussion of reliability coefficients is beyond the scope of this chapter; we defer to
your statistics professor for this explanation.
Validity
In the test construction lingo, when psychologists refer to validity, we are addressing whether a test adequately rather than just accurately measures what it is
supposed to measure (based in part by Anastasi’s, 1988 definition). Two general questions need to be answered: Does the instrument adequately measure
or represent the subject matter intended? Will the data gained from the measure really mean anything? More specifically, will the data be useful to learn
what this measure will tell us for the purpose of this particular assessment of
this particular person, in a particular situation (adapted from Paul, 1969). As
described here, validity is referring to the function of the assessment tool or protocol, rather than just the structure. This description would also fit a discussion
of the validity of a therapy intervention, a client’s self-report, or a significant
others’ report. Several types of validities are specific to test construction/assessment measures, but only a few will be discussed here: construct validity, content validity, concurrent validity, divergent or discrimination validity, and
predictive validity. You should become familiar with these validities, as you will
want to evaluate these psychometric properties for each assessment tool you
consider in your work. Your assessment and research courses will cover these
topics in more depth.
180 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Construct and Content Validity
Many psychological tools have names that represent what they measure,
specifically, the underlying concept or construct that is being addressed. The
Beck Depression Inventory-II (A. T. Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), is one of the
most popular measures of depression. The content of the questionnaire is consistent with the diagnostic criteria of depression, and experts would agree that
this measure inquires about symptoms most commonly associated with depression. The measure has established construct validity, or is said to represent and
cover information assessing the construct of depression.
It is important for measures to have established construct validity, and for
users of assessment instruments to ensure this of the measures they choose.
Caution is warranted because a measure’s name may suggest it covers a certain
topic area, or addresses a particular underlying psychological phenomenon, but
this may not be an accurate label. Quality of life measures vary greatly in how
“quality of life” is operationally defined. Some measures are geared toward assessment of medical patients, and therefore, focus largely on strength and physical function. Other measures of quality of life include more items relating to
spirituality, social and physical relations, and psychological constructs (Simmons et al., 2006). Researchers and clinicians are still trying to operationally
define “quality-of-life” in a meaningful way that allows measures to be developed to represent this concept. Similar difficulties arise in defining the construct of spirituality, transcendentalism, and other nonobservable psychological
constructs (self-esteem, cognitive dissonance).
Once a construct is established, test developers are challenged to ensure
that measures of the construct are content valid. Do the items in the test or measure accurately reflect the construct or domain of interest? How well does the
measure represent the theoretical or scientific construct that has been advanced? When a construct is defined by a particular measure, it is difficult to
separate construct and content validity. The Burnout Inventory (Maslach &
Jackson, 1981) was developed to measure burnout. This instrument includes
scales of exhaustion, skepticism, and personal self-efficacy; these terms are
precisely what have been offered to define and explain burnout, and essentially
no other measures of burnout exist. Users are left to assume that the items in
the inventory assess “exhaustion,” “skepticism,” and “personal self-efficacy,”
(suggesting content validity) and that these scales represent the greater construct of burnout. Without other measures of comparison, it is difficult to conduct further studies of validity (i.e., convergent validity, to be discussed).
Users of psychological assessment tools need to evaluate tests’ psychometric properties to verify how the authors assure users that the test measures the
topic area it intends to measure, and for what populations (for persons of what
ethnicity, age group, or other personal characteristics), the content is valid.
Construct and content validity are particularly important because without
knowing the validity of the measure chosen to evaluate individual characteristics, how can researchers or clinicians know how to interpret the findings they
achieve? Other forms of validity such as convergent and discriminant validity
aid in this evaluation. These types of validity are also common and important
for selecting and determining the utility of a particular test or measurement for
a specific purpose.
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 181
Concurrent Validity, Convergent Validity, and Discriminant Validity
Choosing among the numerous assessment instruments that may be available
for a given construct or topic area is typically based on a variety of factors. If
the psychometric properties are sound, the clinician will then consider the cost
of the instrument, the time it takes to administer or complete it, the time to
score and interpret the results, credentials required to use the test, reading and
writing ability required, appropriateness for intended age group, cultural background, client’s language, and other related reasons. Clinicians and researchers
need to know how the measures they may select compare with other measures
they have available to them. Reported data on a measure’s concurrent validity
provides this information for users.
Concurrent validity refers to how closely the data gleaned from an assessment tool correlates to performance on a different measure at the same point
in time. If childhood anger and childhood aggression are expected to be highly
related in boys with oppositional defiant disorder, it would be expected that
measures of each of these constructs (anger, aggression) will be highly related
when given to a group of boys with these characteristics. As another example,
a test of fine motor skills and a test of speed in copying symbols are likely to be
correlated in senior adults.
Convergent validity is a form of concurrent validity (Kazdin, 2003), and is
related to discriminant validity, which is described later. Convergent validity
refers to the overlap or similarity of two measures’ abilities to assess the same
construct, trait, or behavior. If one measure is compared with another measure
that has predetermined reliability and construct validity, and they are intended
to evaluate the same construct, a high correlation between the measures suggests the comparative measure has convergent validity. If you created a new
depression inventory that was going to be free for public use, took two minutes
to complete, and could be self-administered and scored, potential users would
want to know how your measure correlates with the Beck Depression Inventory-II (A. T. Beck et al., 1996) or the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
(Hamilton, 1960) since these two measures are well-known to have good psychometric properties and much research to support their use.
When evaluating a measure’s convergent validity, ideally the correlation
between the measure in question and measures of comparison will be strong
enough to suggest that the two measures are evaluating the same construct and
gaining relatively the same information if the measure being evaluated improves on or has some advantage over the existing measure. If the goal is to
identify a secondary measure of a particular construct (depression), then finding a measure that is strongly but not entirely correlated with the second measure is ideal. This suggests that the combination of the two measures provides a
more comprehensive picture of clients’ depression than use of only one of the
measures.
Discriminant validity, in essence, is the opposite of convergent validity. Discriminant validity refers to the ability for the measure in question to reveal different information than another measure that is expected to measure a
theoretically different or unrelated construct. “Stress” is a different construct
than optimism. Stress has been defined as an imbalance between the actual or
perceived demands on someone, and the person’s perceived ability to cope or
182 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
respond to such demands (R. Lazarus, 1999). Optimism is defined as “an inclination to put the most favorable construction upon actions and events or to anticipate the best possible outcome” (Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary). These
two constructs are obviously different in theory and presentation. A measure
of depression and a measure of stress may show some relationship when compared in large numbers, but the correlation between these measures is expected to show little or no correlation, since they are measuring separate and
distinct constructs (Kazdin, 2003).
Predictive Validity
Whereas concurrent validity refers to how closely the data gleaned from an assessment tool correlates to performance at the same point in time on a different
measure, predictive validity is established by examining the relationship between
a measure under question and performance on another measure at some point in
the future. To enter graduate school, you most likely had to take the Graduate
Record Examinations (GREs), and the Miller’s Analogy Test (MAT’s). These
tests are intended to predict performance in graduate education. If the results of
these examinations correlate with graduate students’ grade point averages (or
some other measure of academic performance), then these tests would be said
to have predictive validity. Predictive validity is not essential to all tests or
measurements, unless the intended use of the measure is to serve a predictive
function. Some instruments are designed for use as point-in-time assessments
only, and therefore, their ability to predict future behavior or performance on
another measure is not deemed essential.
Methods of Gathering Data
Some assessments are more systematic (scanning the refrigerator and pantry
before going to the supermarket; evaluating budgets in consideration of purchasing large-ticket items), and others are less so (comparison of lines to stand
in at the grocery store). Similarly, assessment techniques in clinical psychology
vary greatly in their purposes and goals, and the methods by which data collection is accomplished. This section discusses methods of data collection, rather
than data instruments directly. Emphasis is placed on structured, formal assessment techniques, rather than on informal methods. Brief explanations of the
following tools are provided: interviews, tests, inventories and checklists, observation, logs and diaries, projective measures, physiological assessment, analog assessment, and instrument-assisted and computer-assisted data collection.
Further reviews of these methods of data collection are likely to be covered in
full assessment courses.
Interviews
The clinician’s most basic tool is an interview. Whether the purpose of a
client-therapist interaction is for assessment only, therapy, forensic evaluation, job counseling, or some other purpose, most interactions do or should
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 183
begin with an interview of some sort. In actuality, most first human encounters take the form of an interview in some sense of the term. One person initiates a series of questions of the other person to gain more information
about the other’s background, expectations, goals, and needs. Think about
your last encounter in a retail store. The salesperson probably asked you the
following questions: “Can I be of help to you? Are you looking for anything
in particular? Do you have a specific price range within which you aim to
stay?” The goal of this line of inquiry is to gain information about you. This is
the same goal of clinical interviewing.
Like effective sales techniques, clinical interviewing goes beyond these
basic questions. Clinical interviewing is goal-directed, requires active purposeful questioning, effective listening and requesting of clarification, observation,
and the “nonspecific factors” (Beutler & Clarkin, 1990; Castonguay, Goldfried,
Wiser, Raue, & Hayes, 1996; Lambert, 1986) of good rapport (warmth, empathy, and unconditional positive regard). More details about how to structure an
interview (even unstructured interviews) and incorporate these components
are discussed in Chapter 8.
The most common types of interviews include initial intake interviews
(first meeting overview), exit interviews (closure to a clinical relationship),
mental status interviews, crisis interviews, and diagnostic interviews. The goals
and purposes of these interviews are the same as the overall goals of assessment.
Among these types of interview, there are three major formats: structured,
semistructured, and unstructured.
Interview Formats
Structured Interviews
Structured interviews are usually published or preestablished and standardized
lists of questions with specific directions or flowcharts of questions to ask following certain responses. These interview outlines (similar to scripts or questionnaires) are used for predetermined purposes (diagnosis, symptom, or
behavior description) and allow for comparison of responses across individuals
or therapists. Since the interviews require little clinical judgment or inference,
persons without graduate training in psychology can be trained to use structured interviews under supervision. The Diagnostic Interview for Children and
Adolescents (DICA-R; Reich, Jesph, & Shayk, 1991) and the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-I; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1997) are two
examples of such interviews.
Semistructured Interviews
Semistructured interviews require more clinical skill and judgment. These interviews, such as the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (Hamilton, 1960), provide a list of questions or content areas that need to be covered. The exact
wordings of the questions or order in which they are asked are determined by
the clinicians. Often, the flow of a semistructured interview seems like a more
natural dialogue between the clinician and client compared with a structured interview, which provides little opportunity for tangential patient self-disclosure
or input into the direction of the interview. Much like structured interviews,
184 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
many semistructured interviews are published in manuals and provide scoring
instructions and normative or comparison scores. Semistructured interviews are
commonly used in qualitative research and in clinical assessments.
Unstructured Interviews
Unstructured interviews are clinician driven, and are usually individualized to
the purpose of the assessment. Since they are not manualized and are not accompanied by administration or scoring instructions, unstructured interviews
are rarely, if ever, used in research settings. The quality of data gathered by clinicians using unstructured interviews is entirely dependent on the clinicians’
interviewing skills, clinical judgment, and insight. This type of interview structure is most susceptible to individual biases and requires the greatest amount of
training and skill for maximum results.
Uses of Interviews
Initial Intake Assessment
Initial intake interviews are designed to gain an overview of a patient’s problems,
strengths, and resources, and reasons for seeking assessment, treatment, or hospital admission. In some ways, it can be viewed as a needs assessment of the patient,
and an opportunity for the clinician’s observation, diagnosis, and short-term
and/or long-term clinical pathway goal planning. Intake interviews often include
a combination of mental status interviews and diagnostic interviews.
Mental Status Assessment
Mental status interviews focus on a client’s current psychological functioning.
The goal of a mental status interview is to gain an overview of client mental
health, and identify normal versus abnormal or unusual thinking, thought processing, behaviors, or other characteristics. This type of interview has specific
components and is mostly factual and data-based. Clinicians make little to no
interpretations of data collected in this type of interview, with the exception of
some estimation of judgment, insight, and intellectual functioning, which may
be largely based on clinical impression.
The mental status interview goes beyond the exchange of questions and
answers, and incorporates many behavioral observations. Behavioral observations include evaluation of the client’s hygiene based on presentation, gait,
speech (normal, pressured, slowed, slurred), eye contact, posture, behavioral
manifestations of mood disorder (e.g., anxiety as represented by excessive fidgetiness or handwringing), and other observations. Traditional questioning is
used to inquire about a client’s orientation to persons (Who are you? Who
brought you here? Who am I? Who is the President of the United States?),
places (Where are you now? What city and state do you live in? Where were
you born?), and time (What time of day is it? What day of the week is it? What
year are we in? What holiday is coming up next?), thoughts, mood, affect, behaviors, short-term memory (e.g., remember this list of three objects, and I will
ask you about them again later) and cognitive functioning (attention, concentration), medical status (e.g., use of medications), illicit and legal substance use,
estimate of intellectual functioning, suicidal and homicidal history or current
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 185
thoughts or plans, insight, and judgment. Assessment of delusions and hallucinations is typically included in this evaluation.
As mentioned, most mental status interviews are conducted as part of an
intake or subsequent evaluation. Because this interview is a standard clinical
method of assessment and not typically used for comparative purposes, formalized rating scales are rarely if ever used. Shea (1988) and Morrison (1995),
among many others, provide a more extensive discussion and guidelines for
mental status interviews.
Crisis Interviews
Psychologists who work in acute psychiatric services, emergency rooms, or outpatient mental health clinics are most likely to conduct crisis interviews. However, most clinical psychologists need to conduct crisis interviews periodically,
regardless of their setting of employment. Crisis interviews are directed toward
clients who are in acute distress due to an exacerbation or increase in psychological disturbance, or who have suffered a traumatic or life-threatening incident. Because these situations can arise in any setting (psychiatric, medical,
school, research, etc.), all therapists must be prepared for the responsibility of
determining clients’ imminent risk for harming themselves or someone else, or
inability to care for themselves, given a heightened state of psychological
arousal or psychotic episode.
Crisis interviews are more focused than intake interviews, and diagnostic
interviews. Often, portions of a mental status exam, if not an entire exam, will
be incorporated into this type of interview. Crisis interviews have the specific
purpose of informing therapists’ decisions about patients’ safety, placement
(psychiatric or medical hospital admission), or immediate intervention (crisis
hotline leading to police outreach). Questions are typically focused on gaining
information about crisis situations, chief symptom complaints, symptom
duration and severity, clients’ safety, resources and supports, risks, and overall
client functioning. Rational and systematic clinical decision making, and
knowledge and facility with procedures for individual settings (e.g., emergency
help contacts, involuntary commitment procedures, steps for assisting women
to leave homes of domestic violence) are two of the most important therapist
attributes necessary for management of crisis situations and crisis interviews.
Exit Interviews
Exit interviews are conducted at the end of an inpatient or outpatient treatment, medical inpatient visit, or occupational tenure. These interviews provide
therapists or another designated professional or paraprofessional with an opportunity to review assessment or therapy content with clients; provide feedback on progress; help clients engage in future thinking about maintenance of
treatment gains or managing future problems; create plans for future crises, relapses, or booster sessions; and gain clients’ feedback on the usefulness of various aspects of the treatment. When exit interviews are conducted by the
therapist at the end of treatment, these interviews are often called “termination
sessions,” although one could argue that ending treatment marks a new beginning for clients, rather than an ending. A termination interview provides a
forum for clients to appropriately express their feelings and emotions about
ending therapy. Effective termination is explored more fully in Chapter 14.
186 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Test Instruments
Tests used in clinical psychology are similar in structure and function to tests
you have been exposed to throughout your education and training. Standardized psychological tests are tools that assess clients’ functioning in terms of personality, educational or cognitive content areas, adaptive skills, or abilities.
Typically, the word test implies that these tools ask questions or use tasks that
have “right” and “wrong” answers to which clients’ responses are compared.
Usually, tests are accompanied by manuals that provide scoring information,
decision rules, and instruction for administration, and standardized results or
scores on the test based on large groups of individuals with specific characteristics (e.g., age groups, culture, gender, “normal” versus “clinical” population).
The results of standardized tests are usually provided in terms of scores on subscales and overall test performance.
Cognitive Function Tests
Tests that are commonly used in clinical psychology include tests of cognitive
functioning: attention, perception, memory, intellectual abilities (e.g., intelligence or IQ testing, such as the Wechsler Scale of Adult Intelligence-III revision; WAIS-III; Wechsler, 1997; Psychological Corporation, 1997), speed in
information processing or dexterity in fine motor skills, and other areas of
neuropsychological or cognitive abilities. Consistent with the assessment goal
of prediction, psychologists might administer aptitude tests to determine
clients’ potential abilities. Aptitude tests are defined as “designed to give a
quantitative estimate of a subject’s ability to profit by training” or measure
“future achievement” (Chaplin, 1985, p. 34). Achievement tests are similar to
aptitude tests, except that current, rather than future, abilities are evaluated.
Achievement tests may be subject-specific, or more global in content. The
Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT; Wilkenson, 1993) is a commonly used
achievement test.
Personality and Symptom Checklists, Inventories, and Scales
If you have ever been surveyed at your local shopping mall, or have completed
a physical history form at your physician’s office, chances are that you have
completed a checklist or inventory. Unlike standardized tests, checklists and inventories generally do not have right or wrong answers, although they should
have psychometric evaluations of reliabilities and validities provided in their
manuals, and typically have comparison scores for various populations. Their
purpose is to assess the presence or absence, or occurrence or nonoccurrence of
particular thoughts, feelings, behaviors, characteristics or traits, over a designated period (e.g., today, past week, past month). The Fear Inventory (Cautela,
Cautela, & Esonis, 1983) is an example of an inventory that offers a list of
items that children commonly fear. An assessor might read this list to a small
child and ask him to endorse items or objects that make him scared: “Are you
afraid of . . . a vacuum cleaner? A barking dog? The dark?” Alternatively, the
child’s parent might respond to the written questions. The Minnesota Multiphasic Inventory-2 (MMPI-2; Duckworth & Anderson, 1995) is a very common
personality inventory used in clinical psychology. Clients are asked to read 567
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 187
adjectives and respond whether each adjective does or does not describe them
by responding to a true-false format.
While checklists are almost always in the form of “check all that apply,” or
“check the top three that apply,” and inventories may take the form of questions or statements to be endorsed, scales assess the frequency (how often?) or
quantity (how much?) of occurrence or nonoccurrence of the characteristics in
question, or the degree to which the individual agrees or disagrees with particular statements. Likert-type scales versus Thurstone scales (to be described) are
used to measure the attitudes, frequencies, or quantities according to ranges expressed in words representing incremental increases (always, sometimes,
never; strongly disagree, moderately disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, moderately agree, strongly agree), or numeric values that have anchors specified on
the instrument (on a scale of 1 to 5, 1 = never, 5 = always). A true Likert scale
is an attitude scale focusing on agreement or disagreement with three or five
incremental values (Chaplin, 1985). This commonly used rating scale method
has been adopted by many and adapted to use ranges from 3 to 10 ascending or
descending values; thus, the format is often referred to as a “Likert-type scale”
versus “Likert scale.”
A Thurstone scale is similar to a Likert scale in that clients’ attitudes are
being assessed about standardized questions, situations, or characteristics.
However, rather than assessing degree of agreement or disagreement, clients
select a statement from a range of statements that is most consistent with their
views. The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; A. T. Beck et al., 1996) uses a
Thurstone scale. An example item similar to those on the Beck Depression Inventory is as follows: Please endorse the statement that best describes how you
feel: (a) I do not feel stressed; (b) I feel stressed; (c) I feel stressed all the time
that I can’t control it; (d) I feel so stressed all the time that I can’t stand it. The
method for deriving the pool of statements is beyond the scope of this chapter;
however, as with other clinical instruments, psychometric properties of any
tests, inventories, checklists, and scales should be evaluated prior to selection.
Checklists, inventories, and scales can either be designed for the client to
complete or for someone else to complete about the client. Given that most assessments should take a multimodal, multimethod, multiinformant approach,
rating-by-others instruments provide a time-efficient means of collecting such
data. Child and adolescent assessments especially rely on ratings by others, such
as ratings by parents, teachers, peers, or significant others. The Conners Rating
Scales for assessment of attention deficit disorders exemplify three versions of a
similar scale: self-report, parent or significant other report, and teacher report.
Observation
Observation is an important part of various types of data collection, such as interviews, role-plays, or analog assessments. However, observation is a data collection method in its own right. It is one of the key tools used in behavioral
assessments, and various strategies are used in this method. Observations may
be conducted in a naturalistic setting (the client’s own home, work, school, or social environment), or in a controlled environment or situation (a simulated environment that the psychologist creates in which the behavior of interest is likely
188 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
to occur). Cost, time, frequency of the behavior, and public or private nature of
the behavior will dictate which setting is likely to be used.
Psychologists and training laboratories often have two-way mirrors in
their offices designed so the client(s) can be in one office where the situation is
set up to encourage the behavior in question, and the psychologist can discretely observe the behaviors in the adjacent office on the other side of the twoway mirror. This setup is an example of a controlled situation. A couple who is
having marital trouble and difficulty communicating may be told to sit in a
room and discuss their finances for 20 minutes, during which time the psychologist observes behaviors such as use of “I” statements (“I feel,” “I think” versus
“you make me feel” . . .), effective listening, interruptions, summarizing statements, raising of voices, cursing, hostility, validation of feelings, and possibly
other behaviors.
In the absence of two-way mirrors, other controlled situations such as
role-plays may be used. Sometimes also called analog assessments, role-plays are
brief interactions between the patient and therapist (posing as someone else
significant to the contrived situation), between two clients, or a client and
psychological assistant (a confederate), that involves the simulation of a scenario in which the client would likely engage (or not) in the behavior under
review.
A 32-year-old male, Jon, who has social anxiety, may be learning techniques to assert himself. During the course of treatment, he decides he wishes
to ask a woman to go on a date, but he feels nervous about doing so. The therapist may ask the client to imagine having the opportunity to speak with the
woman privately, and engage in the dialogue he might have with his potential
date as the therapist role-plays the woman. The importance of role-plays is that
clients actually engage in the behavior, rather than tell the therapist what they
would do. So, instead of Jon saying, “Well, I would walk up to her and maybe I
would say ‘hi.’ I would then probably ask her how her weekend was,” Jon
would actually stand up, cross the room, and approach the therapist as if he
was in the room with the woman he is speaking about. He would initiate conversation as if it were a real-life situation; “Hi Maria. How are you? How was
your weekend? . . .” This interaction is similar to acting in a play. Role-play is a
valuable technique for ongoing assessment, but is also useful for rehearsal to
acquire new skills. Several standardized role-play tests exist (e.g., C. M. Nezu,
Nezu, & Gill-Weiss, 1992), although the majority of these exercises are developed in the moment by clinicians.
Observation as a strategy minimizes the biases that could be introduced
into self-report measures or report-by-others measures (interviews, checklists,
inventories, scales), such as clients intentionally presenting themselves in a
certain way (e.g., good, bad, innocent, passive) by providing inaccurate information. However, the presence of the observer may introduce a new bias. In
naturalistic or controlled settings, the presence of the observer may impact the
frequency or natural occurrence of the client’s behavior in question. A client
may want to put his best foot forward, and therefore, may demonstrate his
“best” behavior, more than he would if he was not aware that he was being observed. Likewise, another client may become shy or inhibited and reluctant
to engage in certain behaviors if she knows she is being watched. Observers,
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 189
therefore, usually situate themselves in inconspicuous places where their presence can eventually be disregarded to some extent. Observations of clients and
their target behaviors take place for a long enough period to acquire a reasonable “sample” of behavior, and allow the client(s) to habituate to (get used to
and tune out) the presence of the observer.
Clinical Example
A psychologist was conducting a behavioral observation of a 9-year-old Hispanic female, Gia, who reportedly had
behavioral problems in the classroom.
On the first visit to the classroom, the
psychologist sat in the back of the room,
so that the other students would not be
constantly watching the “stranger.”
However, the first hour of observation
resulted in little unbiased data because
several of the student’s classmates
turned around frequently to ask questions such as, “Doctor, do you speak
Spanish?” “Doctor, are you here because Gia is crazy?” “Doctor, look at my
cool pencil bag!!” and Gia was initially
seeking the psychologist’s attention.
However, with proper redirection and
nonattendance (“extinction”) of the
children’s behaviors, eventually, they
found other activities to entertain them,
and they lost interest in the stranger!
For the purpose of data collection, observations usually rely on a therapist-created systematic data collection system, and are based on operational definitions
of behaviors to be monitored, called target behaviors. Systematic data collection
systems include measuring the frequency of the occurrence or nonoccurrence
of a particular behavior, descriptions of the behaviors that occurred (perhaps
according to a checklist of adjectives), and record keeping of events of antecedents and consequences to the target behavior. Antecedents are behaviors,
events, or stimuli that are observed to precede the target behavior. Consequences are those behaviors or events that are sequelae to the target behaviors.
Recording observations of antecedents, target behaviors, and consequences allows data collectors to look for patterns in situations that increase, decrease, or maintain the behaviors in question. Skinner (1953) referred to this
type of data interpretation as a functional analysis. Such analyses allow clinicians
to understand, for example, why a mother “loses her control” with her 3-yearold daughter. After making observations either during home visits or discrete office interactions in the waiting room, the clinician realizes that the child begins
yanking on her mother’s sleeve and tapping her relentlessly when the mother is
talking to others or engaging in an activity that does not involve the child. The
mother, in response to this behavior, swats the child from her sleeve and tells
her to “wait a minute.” However, the minute comes and goes, and the child continues this behavior, until finally, the mother turns and yells at the child. Once
she yells, the little girl cries and the mother ultimately picks her up to soothe
her. Based on that brief description, supposing that the child’s nagging behavior
is the target, what do you think are the antecedents and the consequences? Why
does the child continue to engage in this behavior time after time?
190 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Psychologists, clinicians, or laypersons trained by professionals can make
observations and collect data systematically. It is common for clinicians to provide clients or significant others with a data collection system (or record sheets)
and ask them to record their own observations of their behaviors in between
sessions. This introduces the biases mentioned about self-reports, but useful
data may still be obtained. Such observations or rating forms are sometimes referred to as diaries or self-monitoring logs. Data collected by diaries or selfmonitoring logs include food diaries (recordings of dietary intake); individual’s
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors relating to specific problem situations (A. M.
Nezu, Nezu, Friedman, Faddis, & Houts, 1998); record of daily activities; data
logs of daily time spent for relaxation; and mood record forms detailing individual’s maximum anxiety, depression, and pleasantness experienced each day.
Projective Measures
Tests and stimuli such as the well-known Rorschach inkblots, Sentence Completion Tests, and Thematic Apperception Test (see Groth-Marnat, 1990, for a
comprehensive review) are called projective measures because they require examinees to project their unconscious thoughts, feelings, beliefs, wishes, and understanding of the world onto the ambiguous or semistructured stimuli. To
understand the concept of projection, you must consider Sigmund Freud’s theory that persons are born with an id, ego, and superego.
Id, Ego, and Superego
According to Freud, the id represents basic instincts that are uninhibited and
focused on libido, immediate gratification, and excitement; the id is the deepest
level of a person’s unconscious. The ego represents the conscious self, and is the
part of a person’s mind that is aware of others’ needs in addition to one’s own.
The ego is the part of the mind that is responsible for thinking, perception,
memory, and other cognitive processes. It is also responsive to the need for
gratification and may often be conflicted between what the person wants versus what is appropriate in reality. Lastly, the superego is one’s conscience that
leads individuals to distinguish and act according to what is socially right versus
wrong. The superego operates without individuals being aware of it acting; the
superego keeps the ego and id in check!
Projection as a Defense Mechanism
Freud theorized that projection is one of several defense mechanisms a person’s
ego (conscious self) uses to protects itself from trauma.
Projective measures go hand-in-hand with personality assessment and
psychodynamic approaches to assessment and case conceptualization. Projective
measures are also used to aid in diagnosis although results from these tests alone
are not sufficient to make a definitive diagnosis, since this was not their intended use. Projective measures enable clinicians to obtain more data than direct questioning or objective tests and measures for clients who are resistant to
share information or simply for individuals whose defense mechanisms (psychodynamic explanation of persons’ ways of psychologically protecting themselves)
prevent conscious recognition of their own dynamics and characteristics. This
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 191
rationale is more consistent with psychodynamic theories than with cognitivebehavioral theories. The advantage of uncovering information from clients’ subconscious, which may be unavailable to clients’ consciousness, is balanced by
the fact that the conclusions drawn from data obtained are based on evaluator’s
interpretations and theoretical assumptions about personality. For instance, a
client is asked to describe a picture that objectively shows two males on a park
bench looking at the same focal point. The client explains that the picture is of
two orphans who are sadly watching a family enjoy a Sunday afternoon at the
park. There is nothing in the picture that objectively indicates that this is fact.
However, the response may reflect background information about the client’s
personal life, occupational experience, or sense of social awareness. The explanation of the picture goes beyond the objective facts. The interpretation of the
response goes beyond the facts about the client. The client’s description of the
picture is thought to project his or her own thoughts, feelings, beliefs, or experiences. The interpretation of the client’s response may also reflect biases and beliefs the assessor holds about the client.
Physiological Measures
Direct assessment of individuals’ bodily responses to internal and external
events is accomplished through physiological assessments. Such assessments
are common in relation to bodily responses to stress and relaxation, pain (e.g.,
headaches), sexual functioning or dysfunction, and sleep. Examples of physiological assessment devices include biofeedback instruments measuring galvanic
skin response (skin temperature changes), blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (relating to depth of inhales and exhales). Special
training in the use of physiological assessments is required and can usually be
offered through graduate courses, practicum or supervised learning placements, or on-the-job training for technicians.
Taking a closer look at possible uses of physiological assessment, consider
the last time you had an argument or were unexpectedly confronted by someone who was angry with you, do you recall the physical sensations that accompanied your rise in stress? If you are like most people, your heart rate increased,
perhaps your face flushed and your hands became warm, and you may have engaged in rapid breathing patterns (shorter breaths). These sensations might have
also resulted from an internal cue, such as the moment you remembered that
you had forgotten your coat at the restaurant you left 30 minutes prior, or the
recognition that you had forgotten to bring your wallet when you were ready to
pay for your groceries! Physiological assessments allow professionals to evaluate
such responses in individuals to determine the extent of the impact of internal
and external stressors or relaxation practices on their physiology.
An example of physiological assessment in the evaluation of sexual functioning (normal and deviant response patterns) is provided by discussion of the
penile plethysmograph. This instrument is used to measure penile tumescence
or physiological arousal in males in response to provided stimuli (e.g., audiotapes of potentially arousing scenarios, sexually arousing visual images). The
penile plethysmograph has been used frequently in the assessment and treatment of sexual offenders.
192 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Technology-Assisted Data Collection
With the advancement of technology, test developers have sought to ease the
cost and time associated with psychological test administration and interpretation. Computer-assisted interviews are sometimes used to collect initial client
contact information and even diagnoses-related data. Some clients may prefer
to disclose personal information in this seemingly more private fashion; others
may be less likely to share details of their past or current circumstances without
human contact and gentle prompting or questioning. As an initial screening
tool, this method may allow for information to be gathered in a time- and costefficient manner.
Many self-report inventories are also available in computer program format (e.g., MMPI-2). Clients respond to questions on a computer screen, rather
than in the traditional pencil-and-paper format. Responses to such inventories
are computer-scored, and computer-generated interpretative reports can often
be furnished. The benefits of this format over pencil-and-paper formats are obvious—patients are less likely to miss items, legibility is not an issue, and computer scoring saves time. Furthermore, test administration is sure to be
standardized when administered by computers, and decision rules required by
administration of many tests will surely be followed.
There are certain risks or limitations that should be considered. Clients
unused to computers might be computerphobic (older adults, persons who do
not use computers in their daily work or personal life), and therefore, technical
aspects of the computer may distract them from the task. Persons with visual
impairment or mobility/dexterity problems may have difficulty using computers. Another possible limitation is that test administrators may rely too heavily
on computer-generated reports and overlook supplementary or complementary material gathered from other sources, even though the APA Ethics Code
advises caution on this matter (APA, 2002, 9.06). The initial cost of many of the
administration, scoring, and interpretation programs can be exorbitant, and
many programs can only be loaded onto one computer, limiting the portability
of the tests, or accessibility of tests to group practice professionals. Computerassisted tests are becoming more popular, as the pros seem to outweigh the
cons, and the pencil-and-paper tests remain available as alternatives. The Conners’ Continuous Performance Test is an example of a useful computer-assisted
assessment for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Psychologists and other mental health professionals often use other technology to assist in data collection. Tape recorders, video recorders, pedometers,
telephones, and personal handheld computing devices (PDAs), can assist in
data collection and ongoing monitoring of target symptoms, thoughts, feelings,
or behaviors. As a homework assignment, couples may be required, to taperecord their efforts to discuss difficult topics using newly learned communication skills. The clients or clinician can review tape recordings in session, or
privately for reevaluation or provision of feedback. Video recorders might be
used during implementation of behavior modification plans or for parent training. Clinicians might instruct clients to leave voice-mail messages about completion of daily homework assignments or mood-scale reporting. Handheld
devices may be the ideal place for patients to record their coping attempts or
food diary since PDAs are usually carried with avid users at all times, allowing
for immediate recording of pertinent information. These suggestions represent
only a small sample of possible data collection enhancement via computer and
other electronic devices.
Summary
The scientific method provides a paradigm to guide clinicians in conducting assessments. A hypothesis-testing approach to answering assessment questions
leads to a broad-based evaluation of individual strengths, weaknesses, and targeted areas that is open to correction and validation, regardless of the type of assessment being conducted. Operational definitions are critical to specify exactly
what is being examined and for what purpose. Clinicians’ own biases and
heuristics are potential confounds to the assessment process, and mindfulness of
one’s viewpoints is deemed critical. Assessment tools must have reliability and
validity, as emphasized in details about these psychometric concepts. Lastly, several data collection methods, including interviews, tests, checklists, scales, observation, physiological measures, and technology-assisted data-gathering
techniques were discussed highlighting the uses for each of these techniques,
and preferably a combination of several.
A Scientific Approach to Assessment and Methods of Gathering Data 193




The Logistics of the Assessment
and a Closer Look at Interviewing
In this chapter, we take a closer look at how to build an assessment protocol,
how to decide what needs to be assessed, and how to integrate clinical assessment into clinical practice. We discuss the use and integration of psychological assessment tools including clinical interviews, psychological testing,
observation, reports of significant others, reports of other professionals, and
self-reports. A problem-solving approach to clinical decision making and assessment, in particular, is emphasized to assist clinicians in the assessment and
treatment process.Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Explain what a problem-solving approach to clinical decision making is,
and why it is helpful to the process of assessment.
• Describe the steps in problem solving, as applied to clinical decision
making.
• Discuss the process of obtaining informed consent and its importance to
establishing rapport.
• Compare and contrast at least two different types of interview questions.
• Provide at least two prompts that can be used to keep an assessment interview flowing.
• Understand and explain the impact of feedback communicated to patients
and referring parties.
• Recite at least three tips for successful report writing.
196 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Thus far, we have discussed the goals and various types of psychological
assessment and the biopsychosocial paradigm as a model to guide assessment.
We have also applied scientific principles to data collection and outlined methods and tools to conduct assessments; qualifications for responsible test use;
and ethical principles for assessments. You may still have many questions about
assessment procedures. You might be wondering, (a) How do psychologists decide whether to accept a referral for assessment? (b) How do they choose the
type of assessment to conduct? (c) What role does the clinical interview play
when so many standardized tests are available to gather information, and what
does it really entail? (d) How are assessment tools, such as particular tests, selected for specific assessments, beyond looking at the psychometric properties
(reliability and validity) of the instruments? (e) What do psychologists do with
all the information they gather—how is information communicated?
The goal of this chapter is to answer these questions, which all relate to
decisions that the clinician must learn to make involving the logistics of assessment. The clinician must learn these logistics in terms of strategies as well as
procedures. We begin with a discussion of the problem-solving model of clinical decision making (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997) as a
model for assessment strategy. This model provides a useful framework to
guide the assessment (and treatment) process. It will orient you toward thinking critically about each decision that needs to be made throughout the assessment and therapy process, regardless of theoretical perspective. This chapter is
intended to help you “put it all together,” which is probably one of the biggest
challenges graduate students face in applying didactics to clinical settings!
Strategic Logistics and a Problem-Solving Approach
One of the most fascinating and stimulating aspects of clinical work is that no
two clients are the same, and each person is uniquely complex and challenging.
This reality is also what makes clinical decision making and critical thinking
difficult to teach to new clinicians—no “cookbook” exists to guide clinicians
through decision making for assessment and treatment. A. M. Nezu and Nezu
(1989) developed a problem-solving approach to clinical decision making
based on a social problem-solving model that has been applied for treating a
variety of clinical disorders and for increasing social competence (see D’Zurilla
& Nezu, 1999, for a review).
Social Problem Solving
According to the problem-solving model, social problem solving is the cognitivebehavioral process by which individuals understand problems in living and directing their efforts at finding solutions to them (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999; A. M.
Nezu, 1987). According to the clinical decision-making model, the clinician is the
problem solver, faced with the many challenges that accompany each stage of the
therapeutic process. We discuss the therapeutic process according to the following stages: (a) screening and understanding the reason for referral; (b) broad-
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 197
based assessment, including in-depth consideration of the chief complaint, (c)
treatment design, and (d) evaluation of treatment effects.
Understanding the social problem-solving model requires familiarity with
the operational definitions provided for problems, solutions, and effective solutions.
After establishing that foundation, we discuss the core components of the social
problem-solving model: problem orientation, problem definition and formulation, generation of alternatives, decision making, solution implementation and
verification (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999; A. M. Nezu et al., 1998).
A problem, according to the social problem-solving model, is a discrepancy
between one’s current state of affairs or situation and one’s goal (A. M. Nezu,
1987). In daily life, persons are constantly presented with situations or tasks
(demands) that require responses or action to achieve desired goals. These demands may be placed on oneself, or come from others, or the environment.
Discrepancies occur between “what is” and “what one would like a situation to
be” when obstacles interfere with one’s ability to affect the situation or demand.
Obstacles to goal attainment might include intrapersonal variables (maladaptive thinking, biases, actual or perceived skill deficits), extrapersonal variables
(unrealistic demands of others, competing demands or responsibilities, differing goals between self and others), situation-specific variables (uncertainty,
unpredictability, novelty), inadequate psychosocial or tangible resources, or
other conflicts or challenges. Problems may be isolated events (e.g., dealing
with a client in crisis), a series of similar or related events (e.g., classes that run
past the designated ending time, unreliable hired child-care providers leading
to work absenteeism for parents, anger outbursts during interpersonal disagreements), or a pervasive difficulty that occurs for a short or long duration
(e.g., procrastination, stuttering, poor time management, inability to say “no”).
Situations may result in problems for one person, and yet the same situations
may be manageable by another person. Problems are individualistic, and therefore, definable only by the person(s) who is (are) experiencing them.
Using the preceding definition, the problems clinicians confront in the
therapeutic process are still many. Clinicians begin a first session with minimal
information about a client and must eventually understand why each client is
presenting for testing, treatment, or other clinical services. Just because clients
request services of a mental health professional does not mean that the clinician must agree to work with them; deciding whether one is qualified to provide the requested services for each individual is a critical problem that
requires an important decision. This problem may resurface at various time
points in the therapeutic process. Selecting appropriate approaches to assessment from all the available techniques, tests, and formats represents another
clinical problem. Likewise, the intervention stage presents numerous problems
to be solved: selecting and designing, implementing, and evaluating treatments
appropriate for each client, given the individuality of each person’s circumstances, strengths, resources, deficits, needs, and other factors consistent with
the biopsychosocial assessment conducted.
Solutions are defined as any coping response designed to change a problem
situation, one’s emotional reaction to it, or both (A. M. Nezu, 1987; A. M. Nezu,
Nezu, & Perri, 1989). Solutions are also individualistic (one person’s choice to
create a month-long study schedule to prepare for an upcoming exam versus
198 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
another’s plan to cram the night before an exam). The same solution for one
person may be adaptive (spending extensive time alone), whereas it is maladaptive for another, or may be adaptive in one situation, but maladaptive in another
for the same person. Solutions may be effective (assertiveness to prevent disrespect) or ineffective (i.e., aggression in response to disrespect).
The goal of social problem solving is to devise and implement effective solutions. Three specific criteria define effective solutions. Effective solutions, evaluated according to the problem solver’s judgment (a) solve the targeted problem
(meet the desired goal state), (b) maximize the positive consequences, and
(c) minimize the negative consequences. Systematic evaluation of solutions
warrants consideration of individual variables, one’s environment, and the
person-environment relationship (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999). Thus, the goal of
each clinical task in the therapeutic process is to achieve the preestablished shortterm or long-term goals by identifying, selecting, and implementing effective
clinical solutions (identify and operationally define the patient’s problems; prescribe and teach relaxation training to an anxious person in need of behavioral
controls for pain resulting from muscle tension; overcome obstacles to treatment,
such as poor attendance or noncompliance with homework assignments).
Components of Social Problem Solving
Effective solutions and optimal outcomes are achieved through adaptive social
problem solving, according to the clinical decision-making model (A. M. Nezu &
Nezu, 1989). Nezu and Nezu assert that using systematic, rational problemsolving skills aids clinicians in minimizing judgmental errors, and maximizing the
likelihood of selecting and implementing optimal treatments for individual clients.
Social problem solving consists of five main interactive, reciprocal component
processes that are further broken down into specific skills and tactics. The component processes are problem orientation, problem definition and formulation, generation of
alternatives, decision making, and solution implementation and verification. The following
explanations are not as detailed as the original model because a comprehensive discussion of the problem-solving model and its applications is beyond the scope of
this chapter. The interested reader is referred to several problem-solving therapy
manuals (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1999; A. M. Nezu et al., 1998), and the most relevant
clinical decision-making book (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989) for in-depth discussion.
Problem Orientation
Problem orientation is a motivational set or worldview—how a person tends to
think about problems, based on his ideas, beliefs, and assumptions. Does he view
problems as challenges or barriers? Does the problem-solver believe in her ability to solve problems effectively, or does hopelessness or helplessness override
her feelings of self-efficacy? Problem orientation can either facilitate or hinder
effective problem solving, and the use of the other problem-solving skills.
For clinical decision making, worldview incorporates one’s theoretical orientation, or the set of ideas, beliefs, and assumptions about human behavior,
personality, and change, that the clinician uses. Adhering to the biopsychosocial
model as a paradigm for understanding behavior, subscribing to multimodal,
multimethod, multiinformant, time-series approaches to assessment, or adhering to specific ethical guidelines represent components of one’s worldview. Clinicians’ worldview is believed to guide problem-solving efforts relating to
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 199
clinical decisions (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, & Lombardo, 2004). The common use of
heuristics (discussed in Chapter 7) and biases that are likely to positively or negatively influence clinicians’ decisions are also encompassed in their worldview.
Problem Definition and Formulation
If you went to your physician’s office today and told him or her that you “don’t
feel well,” how will he attempt to rectify this problem? Will he provide you
with aspirin? How about an ice pack? Will she offer an ointment of some kind?
Will he recommend bed rest or more exercise? Unless you are truly not feeling
well at this moment (in which case your mind immediately gravitated to your
specific symptoms), neither you nor your doctor could predict how you would
be treated. Why? Because not feeling “well” could mean many different things.
Your doctor would not know whether (s)he should concentrate on your eyes or
your ankles! Most likely, your doctor would ask you specific questions about
your current state of well-being, or lack of well-being. The physician needs to
identify the specific problem(s), clarify his or her understanding of the problem,
and establish goals for treatment outcome.
This is the essence of the problem definition and formulation component
of problem solving, and the importance of this step in the process cannot be
sufficiently emphasized. Identifying and defining problems and establishing
goals for each stage of therapy are essential to progress efficiently and effectively toward needed results. The following questions highlight some of the
problems to be defined throughout the therapeutic process: Why is the patient
seeking treatment? What are the components of the person’s problem, such as
cognitive distortions, dysfunctional family patterns, newly acquired physical
disability? What unique client or therapist variables limit the clinician’s ability
to implement a particular empirically based therapeutic intervention? Why
hasn’t a treatment regimen led to the gains expected?
Effective problem definition and formulation relies on several skills and
tasks. Problem solvers (clinicians, in this case) engage in the following practices. They (a) seek all available facts and information about the problem; (b)
describe these facts in clear and unambiguous terms; (c) differentiate relevant
from irrelevant information, and facts from assumptions; (d) identify the specific factors that make the situation a problem for the particular therapist,
client, or both; (e) set realistic and attainable problem-solving goals (D’Zurilla
& Nezu, 1982, 1999; A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1989, 1998).
Generation of Alternatives
Once a problem is defined and realistic goals are set, problem solvers need to
find ways to reach these goals. To attain goals, effective solutions, as earlier defined, must be identified. This is not an easy or immediate task for many people. If it was, a problem might not have occurred in the first place! The goal of
the generation of alternatives component of problem solving is to use creativity
and broadened thinking to conjure up as many potential solutions as possible;
evaluation of the alternatives comes later.
Brainstorming skills are prescribed to identify effective solutions, according
to the problem-solving model (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 1982, 1999; A. M. Nezu &
Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al., 1989, 1998). Two rules govern brainstorming
efforts: (1) the quantity principle, and (2) deferment-of-judgment principle. The
200 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
quantity principle simply suggests that generating as many ideas as possible will
increase the likelihood that an optimal solution will result—quantity leads to quality. Since people are often used to relying on previously developed skills, ideas, or
techniques, it is sometimes difficult to “think outside the box,” and as a result, a
person’s usual ideas surface and may be quickly rejected. The deferment-ofjudgment principle dictates that ideas are not evaluated during brainstorming,
since “nay-saying,” or “yes-butting” (yes, but, this won’t work because . . .), closes
off the creative process, and stifles efforts to think of novel alternatives or use ordinary solutions in novel ways. Thus, more high-quality ideas are likely to result
if judgment of alternatives is suspended during this process.
Generating alternative solutions to clinical problems becomes necessary
in a variety of circumstances. Consider how the complexity of individual client
variables might affect assessment or treatment planning. Cognitive or physical
disabilities might limit the type of standardized tests you could administer,
either because the client cannot understand the tasks presented, is incapable of
carrying out the required tasks because of physical limitations (visual impairment, loss of limbs or mobility), or the test manuals do not provide normative
data to compare results you might acquire by alternative means. Language barriers between clinicians and clients also pose a problem to be solved to effectively assess and treat individuals from differing backgrounds.
Another challenge frequently faced by clinicians is how to comprehensively assess and treat individuals who present with multiple symptoms and diagnoses. Although the repertoire of empirically validated and empirically
supported treatment options is growing, many of these preferred treatments
provide limited guidance for working with patients who are concurrently taking psychiatric medications or have multiple diagnoses. Lack of available prescribed treatment options for certain patient populations (e.g., individuals with
mental retardation or comorbid psychosis), therapists’ or clients’ constraints on
time, and inadequate money, resources, or availability to provide or receive the
optimal treatment needed suggest additional problems where brainstorming for
solutions will be particularly necessary.
Decision Making
If the rational problem-solving process was followed sequentially up to this
point, the clinician has identified the problem to be solved, goals, and possible
alternative solutions. Decision making comprises a set of skills to facilitate the
selection of the potentially most effective alternative solution and the construction of a decision plan. Solution alternatives are evaluated based on the anticipated or predicted consequences that might result if particular alternatives
were implemented. The selection process is based on consideration of the utility of each alternative (C M. Nezu & Nezu, 1995). The utility of an alternative
is judged by two factors: the likelihood of obtaining the identified goal, and the
value of the alternative, which is evaluated by considering the effects on oneself (personal effects; e.g., as a therapist) and others (social effects; the client
and those affected by the client’s treatment), and the effects likely to result in a
short-term and long-term time frame. Such anticipated consequences are evaluated in terms of a cost-benefit analysis. A rating system (positive [+], negative
[−], neutral [0]) allows the costs and benefits of each alternative to be compared when the analysis of all solution options is completed.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 201
Applied to clinical decisions in assessment, the therapist must consider the
utility of each possible means of assessing a client. If a client’s characteristics
seem to suggest a personality disorder, brainstorming would promote exploration of means to assess personality to identify the type and nature of the
client’s personality disorder. Review of assessment literature reveals numerous
assessment options: objective personality tests (e.g., the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory, the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory), projective
tests (Rorschach inkblot test), clinical diagnostic interviewing, and so on. The
assessor then needs to consider (a) the likelihood that a specific assessment tool
or a combination of specific assessment tools would confirm or disconfirm the
personality disorder suspected; (b) the personal effects the use of each test
would have on the therapist (what does the therapist need to do to ensure ethical, competent use of the test, how much time and effort would administration
take, and is this reasonable within the constraints of his or her practice?); (c)
the effects on others (the client and those affected by the client’s assessment;
e.g., what will the emotional or financial cost of the assessment be for the
client, and how will the assessment help the client in treatment planning? Is the
client dependent on someone else for transportation, and if so, how will the
time requirements of the assessment affect this person?); (d) the immediate
short-term effects of assessing a personality disorder in a particular client, such
as increasing the likelihood of selecting an optimal treatment approach for the
individual; and (e) the long-term effects (e.g., what ramifications will result
from labeling the individual as having a borderline personality disorder?).
Examples provided here only represent one or two possible consequences
under each heading. During the decision-making phase, problem solvers are
encouraged to think about as many predicted consequences as possible under
each of these headings, and to evaluate each alternative by comparing the overall positive, negative, and neutral consequences that exist for each possibility.
The goal of the decision-making step is to select the optimal or most effective
solution by finding the alternative that reaches the predetermined problemsolving goal, maximizes the positive consequences and minimizes the negative
consequences.
Once an alternative is selected, the problem-solving model (Felgoise,
Nezu, & Nezu, 2002; A. M. Nezu et al., 1997) recommends making a decision
plan. A decision plan requires the problem solver to consider the best means
(e.g., under what conditions or circumstance?) for implementing the solution
selected, and to develop a method to monitor and evaluate the actual consequences that result from implementing the solution plan. If home visits were
required for assessment of a child with behavior problems, when would be the
best time of day or week to increase the likelihood of observing the problematic
behaviors or troubling interactions? What equipment or observation recording
tools should the assessor bring along? These are just two of many points to consider in developing a solution plan for this problem.
Solution Implementation and Verification
The first three components (problem definition and formulation, generation
of alternatives, and decision making) of the problem-solving process are intended to collectively result in the selection of a solution. In the solution implementation and verification stage, the solution is actually carried out, and
202 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
the resulting consequences are observed and evaluated in comparison with
the consequences that were previously predicted or anticipated (D’Zurilla &
Nezu, 1999). The effectiveness of the solution is determined based on this
evaluation, and the problem solver is encouraged to either self-reinforce
(“give yourself a pat on the back”) if the problem is solved, or troubleshoot if
the problem is not resolved. Details of these steps are incorporated into the
following vignette.
Suppose you have decided that a cognitive-behavioral treatment for social
anxiety would be most appropriate for your 22-year-old male client named
Gerry. This decision was made based on a thorough multimodal, multimethod
time-series assessment, and Gerry agreed with your proposed intervention.
When you selected this option, you considered the personal, social, short-term
and long-term consequences for yourself as the therapist, and Gerry—the
client. The predicted consequences of this alternative (in comparison to no
treatment, drug treatment, other therapies, or a combination of various options) appear to be largely positive across all domains for all individuals involved. The expectation is that Gerry’s anxiety will decrease in social situations
as evidenced by an increase in his ability to attend social gatherings, hold conversations with peers, and eventually ask others to join him for a social outing
(either a date or a group gathering). You also anticipate that Gerry will have a
decrease in negative intrusive thoughts about himself and others’ perception of
him, and that he will decrease his avoidance of interacting with others. As part
of the decision plan, you and Gerry created several self-monitoring forms for
him to use to monitor his thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
Once treatment begins, these forms become the basis for evaluating the
magnitude of the intervention’s success. If the frequency of negative thoughts
and feelings decrease, and positive behaviors increase within a reasonable time
frame, and therefore, the anticipated outcomes and the actual outcomes match,
reinforcement of Gerry’s efforts and success is warranted. If Gerry does not improve as expected, and a discrepancy between anticipated and actual consequences occurs, reevaluation of the intervention (type chosen, manner of
implementation, etc.), and perhaps, the specifics of the assessment (circumstances in which change is required, or targets for change), is necessary to determine the interfering obstacles. Even if treatment is not successful at this
stage, clinicians are encouraged to independently reinforce clients’ attempts to
work toward their goals.
With problem solving and decision-making strategies in mind, let’s look at
the step-by-step procedural logistics of conducting a clinical assessment.
Procedural Logistics and Clinical Skills
How does one go about conducting a psychological assessment? The process requires two primary sets of clinical skills; gathering relevant data and integrating information into an explanatory case report. We are going to work
backward in our illustration, beginning with an example of the case report and
then detail how data were gathered and information integrated and used toward the initial purpose.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 203
In keeping with the problem-solving model, the following case report illustrates the goal for an intake assessment. The ultimate goal of an assessment
is to gain enough information about the individual (couple, family) to develop
an understanding of the person’s identified problem and what is maintaining
the problem, and to offer recommendations commensurate with the collected
and interpreted data to answer the referral question. This information is integrated in some written fashion in the client’s formal record of clinical service.
Particularly when the information needs to be communicated to a third party,
the clinician may prepare a comprehensive integrative report, similar to this
case illustration.
The following case report is presented in its entirety and then dissected to
show how information is obtained and then integrated for a specified purpose.
Readers should note that the format of this report represents only one model
of a psychological report, although it is a fairly prototypic example. Many other
excellent styles and useful formats exist. The description of Mrs. Giunardini
represents a composite case example to protect individual identities.
Psychological Assessment Report
Patient’s name: Gina Giunardini
Date of Evaluation: Wednesday, June 19,
Some Year
Date of Report: Friday, June 21, Some
Year
Identifying Information: Mrs. Giunardini
is a tall, 32-year-old, first-generation
Italian female, with dark hair and slim
build. She presented in casual and neat
dress, slouched posture, and anxiety
manifested by handwringing, fidgeting
in her chair, and pressed speech.
Reason for Referral: Mrs. Gina Giunardini
is a 32-year-old mother of two male children (9 and 11 years old), who separated
from her husband 2 weeks ago as a result of his extramarital relationship.
Three days prior to her clinical intake,
Mrs. Giunardini learned she is 2.5
months pregnant with her husband’s
child. Her gynecologist referred her to
the mental health clinic as a result of her
extreme emotional distress in response
to this news, and her self-reported confusion and perceived inability to cope
with the decision that needed to be made
regarding her pregnancy. The physician
stated that in addition to being “shocked
and scared,” Mrs. Giuanardini made several references to “not being able to handle things,” and “needing a way out.”
Background/History
Social/Family/Religious History
Mrs. Giunardini lived with her parents
until she married her husband, Anthony, at the age of 20. She had one
prior relationship with another male for
6 months. Initially, she and her husband
moved into an apartment, but returned
to live with her parents within a few
months because they could not afford
the rent. Mrs. Giunardini became pregnant with their first child within a year
of their marriage, and their second
child, 2 years later, at which time they
moved into the three-bedroom row
house where she and her children currently reside. She describes herself as
someone who “went right from being a
kid to being a wife and mother.” Her
mother helped her raise her children in
their early years. Mrs. Giunardini reports having had little social contact
(continued)
204 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Psychological Assessment Report (Continued)
with other women her age, other than
through playgroups, parenting responsibilities, and occasional get-togethers
with her husband’s friends and their
wives. She reports having no close
friends, other than her mother, her
three brothers, and her husband. Her
primary daily activities, in addition to
childrearing responsibilities, include
jogging, spending time with her parents,
and watching late-night television.
Mrs. Giunardini’s family of origin
consists of her mother and father, both
immigrants from Italy, and three brothers, ages 39, 41, and 42. She reports
good relations with all family members.
Her mother was described as “caring,
but she holds her emotions in; she keeps
the family in line. She can be stubborn
and touchy, but she’s had a hard life.”
Her mother has a progressively worsening case of emphysema, and has seemed
“depressed” for the past several months.
Mrs. Giunardini assists her father in caring for her mother, in addition to routinely cooking for her parents. Mrs.
Giunardini described her father as “a
good guy who doesn’t say too much. He
is stern, but loving and protective.” Her
parents have emphasized the importance of family and church, and, according to Mrs. Giunardini, have sacrificed a
lot on behalf of their children. Her
brothers are all married with children,
and reportedly protective and watchful
of Mrs. Giunardini; she sees them approximately one time per month. According to Mrs. Giunardini’s report, the
family embraced her husband Anthony
as if he were their “own blood.”
Mrs. Giunardini reports having a
strong religious belief system rooted in
her Roman Catholic upbringing. She
had always attended church weekly
with her family, until her separation.
She has not attended church since the
separation because her husband attends
the same church. Although her faith is
a source of strength for her, she stated
that she has not been able to “figure
out the lesson” in Anthony leaving her.
Educational/Vocational/
Occupational History
Mrs. Giunardini completed high school
at a private Catholic high school. She
states that she did not go to college because she did not have a direction for a
particular career. She worked for her father’s construction company by answering phones, until she married. Once she
married, Mrs. Giunardini states she focused on being a homemaker, but occasionally helped her husband in his deli.
Currently, out of perceived necessity,
she is considering career and educational options, and contemplates pursuing a nursing degree.
Medical History
Mrs. Giunardini reports no significant
past medical problems. Her two prior
pregnancies were unremarkable. A history of positive health behaviors regarding diet, exercise, minimal use of alcohol
(1 glass of wine daily) and tobacco
(none) were reported. However, Mrs.
Giunardini believes she may have gained
some weight (5 to 7 pounds) in the past
few weeks. Mrs. Giunardini reportedly
drinks two to three cups of coffee daily.
Mental Health History
Mrs. Giunardini reportedly participated
in brief therapy (1 month; 4 sessions)
with a social worker after the birth of
her second child, in response to a recommendation from her obstetrician/
gynecologist. She reported feeling overwhelmed, “a little down,” and “sort of
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 205
Psychological Assessment Report (Continued)
trapped.” Her ability to cope with the
adjustment of her growing family increased during this supportive psychotherapy according to her report. She
could not recall specific skills gained
during treatment. No other treatment
or need for treatment was reported.
Mental Status Examination
Mrs. Giunardini, a 32-year-old ItalianAmerican female of tall and slender
build appeared her age, was oriented to
person, place, and time, and was cooperative with the evaluator. Dressed casually and neatly with her long hair
tied back, Mrs. Giunardini maintained
a slouched posture and intermittent eye
contact throughout the interview. Her
speech tone was quiet and her speech
rate was pressed. She manifested anxiety as evidenced by her worried
thoughts, “I can’t stop thinking about
what has happened. . . . I am so worried about what will happen to us (herself and children). . . . My thoughts
keep racing about what to do”; and behaviors, including fidgeting in her chair
and handwringing.
Her mood was sad, anxious, and angry; her affect was appropriate to topic,
and she reported feeling “desperate”
and alone; she was tearful at times. Additional content of Mrs. Giunardini’s
thoughts revolved around her role as a
wife, mother, and daughter. She thinks
of herself as a “good mom and daughter,” and now questions whether she
has been a “good” or “bad” wife, due to
the circumstances with her husband.
She focused on her need to make a decision regarding her pregnancy (to
maintain it or not), how she would
manage to raise three children as a single parent, and what was “fair” to her
sons. Although Mrs. Giunardini stated
that she sometimes wishes she would
“go to sleep and not wake up,” she denied active suicidal ideation, past or
present. She dismisses thoughts of suicide due to her strong religious beliefs
and her responsibility to her children
and parents. No evidence of a thought
disorder was observed; short- and longterm memory is intact; hallucinations
and delusions were denied.
Mrs. Giunardini reportedly drank
one glass of wine per day, prior to
learning of her pregnancy; she denies
current or past tobacco or other substance use. Mrs. Giunardini is estimated to have average intelligence,
good insight and judgment. Prognosis is
estimated to be good based on past
coping history, positive response to
therapist, statements of feeling more
“hopeful” by the end of the session, and
willingness to pursue intense therapy
(crisis counseling) for the next 2 weeks,
and as needed thereafter.
DSM-IV Diagnosis
Axis I: Adjustment Disorder with
Mixed Anxiety and Depression
Axis II: Deferred. R/O Dependent Personality Disorder
Axis III: Pregnancy
Axis IV: Psychosocial stressors: Family
(caring for her mom); marital relationship; occupational
problems
Axis V: Current Functioning: GAF:
65; Highest GAF in past year:
90.
Clinical Impressions
Mrs. Giunardini is a young ItalianAmerican female who has been raised
with traditional cultural beliefs emphasizing the woman’s place in the home
(continued)
206 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Psychological Assessment Report (Continued)
and family as a primary responsibility
and role. She has enjoyed and relied on
the support of her family of-origin,
husband, and children for social contact
and development of her identity as a
daughter, mother, and wife. She identifies herself through these roles, as does
her mother and sisters-in-law. She is,
therefore, experiencing extreme distress in reaction to the disruption of her
primary role as a wife, her “failed relationship” with her husband, in addition
to the reality that she is pregnant and
faces the possibility of being a single,
divorced mother who has not held
steady employment since her teenage
years. These major life changes present
the possibility of embarrassment to her
and her family, and the necessity for her
to reevaluate her strengths, weaknesses, and capabilities, although she
has not begun to do so. Mrs. Giunardini
has not contemplated or explored the
possibility that her marriage might be
reparable or that her husband might
wish to return to his family.
As a result, of these life changes, Mrs.
Giunardini has had many negative
automatic thoughts relating to poor
self-confidence (“I don’t think I can
handle life on my own.”), poor coping
(“I have no way of handling things. I’m
going to lose it. I’m going to fall apart.”),
poor self-efficacy for independence (“I
couldn’t make it on my own. I have no
job, no skills, no money of my own, and
no way of getting these things while I
am taking care of two or possibly three
children.”), and catastrophic thoughts
pertaining to others’ possible perception
of her (“Gina must have been a horrible
wife. Gina couldn’t satisfy her husband
or keep her family together. What did
Gina do to drive her husband away?”).
Her feelings of despair, fear, and anxiety
are related to the novel situation she
never anticipated experiencing, her perceived lack of ability to cope with the
situation, and her self-imposed isolation
from persons other than her parents,
since the separation. Her predominant
coping behaviors have included eating
more than usual, crying frequently,
avoidance of others, and seeking therapy. It seems likely that Mrs. Giunardini’s avoidance of others, her mother’s
poor health, which has rendered her unable to comfort Mrs. Giunardini in her
usual manner, and her pattern of panicked, anxious, and depressed negative
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are
maintaining her current feelings of
helplessness and inability to effect positive action.
Mrs. Giunardini’s initiation of therapy
and her response to the first consultation/intake session suggests that Mrs.
Giunardini is open to gaining guidance in adopting more rational and
systematic thinking and learning new
coping skills, such as problem solving,
relaxation techniques, communication
skills, and other independent skills that
will aid her in accomplishing the new
life challenges at hand. With regard to
her decision making about the pregnancy, it is expected that Ms. Giunardini
will be able to arrive at an acceptable decision within the next week by attending
biweekly therapy sessions and following
agreed-on homework to facilitate her
problem-solving process. She does not
appear to be in imminent danger of
hurting herself or others (children, husband), seems stable to continue to reside
and care for her children (although she
was encouraged to seek familial support
for the next 2 weeks), and seems reliable
and trustworthy regarding her commitment to return to therapy.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 207
Reflective Questions
Now that you have read the comprehensive intake evaluation of Mrs. Giunardini, take a moment to reevaluate the report in the context of what you have
learned from Chapter 7. What was (were) the apparent goal(s) of the assessment? In reviewing the biopsychosocial model of assessment, were all aspects
of this model considered and represented in this summary report? What additional information would you want to obtain in a second session with Mrs.
Giunardini, if you had one?
Psychological Assessment Report (Continued)
Recommendations
Mrs. Giunardini was encouraged not to
make an immediate decision about the
pregnancy (within the first few days of
gaining this news), due to the tendency
for her emotions to interfere with rational decision making, and the potential
for regret if she makes an impulsive decision. As a result of cooperative problem solving in session, Mrs. Giunardini
was prompted to consider all persons
who could be supportive and helpful to
her during her decision-making process
(older brother’s wife, mother, priest, gynecologist), and evaluate the probable
positive and negative consequences that
might arise from her seeking their support in this decision. Likewise, in-session
discussion aided Mrs. Giunardini to begin evaluating both positive and negative
consequences to maintaining the pregnancy and giving birth, rather than only
the negative consequences that seemed
readily apparent. She was directed to
begin considering consequences for herself, her sons, her family, and other important persons in session, and complete
this effort prior to the next session.
Mrs. Giunardini agreed to record her
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors relating to her pregnancy, separation, and
future to help her to gain a better understanding of her responses to these
major life stressors, and to aid the therapeutic process in identifying areas for
change. Education regarding the connection between thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors, and the impact of her role
models’ and her own past coping efforts
on her current functioning were explained. Due to the complexity and
critical time frame within which Mrs.
Giunardini must decide to keep or terminate the pregnancy, she was encouraged to consider what areas of her life
would need to change if she chose
either of the two options, and to consider if these changes seemed at all possible (e.g., obtaining a job or financial
assistance, or seeking forgiveness from
the church and herself if she chose to
terminate the pregnancy), but was directed to postpone thinking of how she
would make these changes until later.
These recommendations were made in
attempt to focus Mrs. Giunardini, reduce her overwhelming feelings, and
break down her problems into a more
manageable framework. It was recommended to Mrs. Giunardini that she
consider others’ opinions within the
context of her own situation, morals,
and ideals, and that therapy would be
led in an objective manner, without
influencing her toward either decision
based on anything other than her
own rational and systematic decisionmaking process
208 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Because the report represents only one meeting with the client, the information is entirely based on self-report. What additional strategies or methods
would you choose to further the evaluation and take a multimodal, multimethod, multinformant, time-series approach to assessment? Based on Mrs.
Giunardini’s primary problem, would you have the luxury of conducting such
an evaluation in the necessarily limited time frame? If not, how would you decide what to include or not to include? Consider the problem-solving model of
clinical decision making in your exploration of these questions.
Once you have given these questions some thought, you are ready to proceed to the following sections on clinical interviewing and the procedural logistics of conducting an assessment.
Methods of Data Collection
Our discussion of the procedural logistics of assessment follows the framework
of the report previously generated. In this section, we address where information comes from and how we collect it. The strategies and skills described will
help you arrive at the information necessary to include in an intake evaluation
such as that of Mrs. Giunardini. Our discussion of assessment procedures looks
carefully at the clinical interview as a primary tool, and how the clinician integrates various methods of data collection into the clinical interview.
Identifying Information
A brief description of the client is usually provided in the beginning of each report to help orient the recipient of the report (other than the client) to recall
the patient. Likewise, if another professional receives a report prior to meeting
the client, it will help the professional identify the client on arrival. Identifying
information is usually gathered from the referral source and directly from the
client.
Reason for Referral or the Referral Question
Each client-professional relationship begins because someone (the client, a
client’s family member, another professional) has requested consultation, assessment, or therapy for the identified patient. The specifics of this initiation
are critical to planning what should happen in the first meeting and subsequent
meetings, or even the appropriateness of a meeting at all! Using the problemsolving approach to clinical decision making (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989), the
first “problem” presented here is to concretely and objectively define the reason
for referral. Answering the questions “Who?” “What?” “When?” “Where?”
“Why?” and “How?” will help clarify the reason for referral.
Who?
It is not always clear who the identified client will be. If a husband and wife appear in the office together, is it because they are both seeking treatment, or is
one spouse attending to be supportive of the other? If a child is having problems
in school, is the child the focus of the evaluation or is the family unit the in-
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 209
tended client? So the question, “Who is to be evaluated?” although seemingly
basic at first glance, may not be. There are other important “who” questions:
Who is requesting the evaluation (referral source)? Who is paying for the evaluation (the school, courts, self, other)? Who will receive copies of the final report? Who will provide the feedback to the client (the referring physician or
you, the clinician)? Who, if anyone, has explained to the client the purpose of
the evaluation?
In the case of Mrs. Giunardini, most of the answers to these questions are
evident. Some, however, are known to the clinician, but were not relevant to
include in the report. Knowing who will receive the report is important to direct the language used in the report and the amount of detail provided. Knowing who will pay for the evaluation is important for billing purposes, and if it is
not known ahead of time, reviewing these questions will cue the clinician to
handle financial matters before beginning the professional relationship.
What?
Probably the most important “what” question is, What is the goal of the assessment? The answer to this key question will ultimately guide the rest of the
evaluation. Remembering back to Chapter 7, is the goal to diagnose/classify or
describe the person’s problems or predict future behavior? More specific
“what” questions pertaining to the client’s problems and goals will further define the structure and content of your assessment: What are the reasons that
led to the referral? What is the client’s chief complaint? What is the referral
source’s impression of the client (if the client is not self-referred), including his
or her perception of the problem? What is the expectation of the referral source
for the visit (consultation, assessment and treatment, evaluation only, specific
testing), and can you meet this expectation? What is the client’s goal for seeking your services? What information can the referral source or others provide
you with to help you better understand the purpose of your assessment (previous records, recent evaluations, medical information)?
If you cannot gain answers to the “what” questions presented here (and
often you may not be able to), you must prepare yourself to obtain this information directly from the client. If a potential client speaks with you to schedule
the first appointment, perhaps you will ask some of these questions over the
phone. If you have someone who schedules your appointments for you or you
see walk-ins, you may have to begin an initial evaluation with very limited information, and ask questions to obtain answers on meeting the client. In the
case of Mrs. Giunardini, the gynecologist called the clinician directly, and
therefore, some dialogue allowed the clinician to gain the physician’s perspective prior to meeting Mrs. Giunardini. This was particularly helpful for the clinician because she could consider the parameters of her assessment prior to
sitting down with the patient.
When?
Many “when” questions can be asked. When did the problem begin, and when
(under what circumstances) is the situation most problematic? When was the
referral made, and how long did it take for the client to follow through with
scheduling an appointment? When does the assessment need to be completed
210 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
to answer the referral question or aid the referring person? If surgical treatment is dependent on clearance from a psychology professional, it is likely that
the evaluation must be completed immediately to be of any value. If the referral person’s time frame is not reasonable given your practice schedule, the
client’s schedule, or the length of time needed to conduct a thorough assessment, the clinician must engage in problem solving to consider how this problem will be resolved.
Where?
At this stage of the evaluation, regarding the reason for referral, where relates to
both the chief complaint or problem and the setting in which the evaluation
will take place. Where does the problem occur (workplace, home, social situations)? Will the patient be seen in an inpatient or outpatient clinic, a medical
hospital, or physician’s office for the psychological evaluation? In the later sections of Mrs. Giunardini’s report, many “where” questions are answered:
Where does she live, or where does she participate in social activities? The basic
“investigative reporter” questions (e.g., Who? What? Where?) leading to a
clear definition of the reason for referral will be used throughout the evaluation process.
Why?
Why is the client seeking a consultation, evaluation, or treatment now (at this
particular time in his or her life)? This question addresses the motivations of
the client and the precipitating factors that led to the need for the clinician’s services. One might also ask, why is the client seeking the services of a mental
health professional (versus another health professional or other care provider)?
This is an important question to consider when a referral is made or when an
initial meeting is held. Perhaps, the client has little understanding of what psychologists or therapists do. Is there an expectation for treatment with medication or spiritual guidance? Has the person exhausted all other options and is
meeting with the psychologist as a last resort? Gaining the answer to this important “why” question serves as an impetus for conversation to ensure that
the client’s expectations are reasonable and the clinician’s understanding and
expectations placed on him or her are also accurate and realistic.
Mrs. Giunardini was referred to the psychologist because she was “confused,” perceived herself as unable to cope, and needed to make a decision that
was beyond the realm of the medical information her gynecologist provided to
her. Although the clinician agreed to meet with Mrs. Giunardini and believed
the referral was appropriate to her expertise, she also recognized that Mrs. Giunardini had strong spiritual and religious convictions that would influence her
decision making, and might require discussion beyond what the psychologist
could provide to her. Her recommendations included advice that Mrs. Giunardini consult with her trusted priest about matters that would influence her decision-making process.
How?
How questions pertaining to the reason for referral might overlap somewhat
with the why questions already presented. How can you help the client? How
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 211
much interaction will you have with the referral source prior to and following
the evaluation? How much information does the client expect you to have
about him or her? How much information does the referral source want back
from you? How much information, if any, will be shared with other persons involved in the identified client’s problem? Considering these questions will remind clinicians of their legal and ethical responsibility to obtain informed consent
forms and release forms for any information from the client and all other relevant parties. These important documents are reviewed later on in this chapter.
By answering the preceding questions, and certainly any additional ones
that fit within this context, you should have gained a solid basis for your meeting with your client, and have established that you are an appropriate person to
conduct the intake or assessment. Having a clearer understanding of the specific
goal of your meeting will enable you to tailor your first interview to address the
relevant topics that will allow you to answer the referral question, or to identify what further meetings will be needed to accomplish this. Use of the brainstorming technique followed by decision making will allow you to formulate
your plan. Solution implementation is illustrated in the following sections,
which describe data collection and interviewing.
Background or History, Mental Status, and Information for
Clinical Impressions
In most reports that are generated from initial interviews, intakes, or comprehensive assessments, psychologists include the same basic components: background history, current mental status, summaries of objective and subjective
testing, DSM-IV diagnosis, clinical impressions, and recommendations. As you
can see from Mrs. Giunardini’s report, a lot of information must be obtained in
usually a relatively short period (anywhere from 30 minutes to 90 minutes, depending on the circumstances). Information for the overall evaluation may
come from a variety of assessment techniques (interviews, tests, questionnaires, inventories, etc.). However, all psychological evaluations require an interview, at minimum. Hence, the clinical interview is emphasized.
Begin with an Interview
Once the referral source has been contacted and you have clarity about the
purpose and goal of the assessment, the actual evaluation or intake begins. Regardless of whether you are conducting an intellectual assessment, personality
assessment, diagnostic assessment, or evaluation for some other purpose, the
interview should always precede any other formal testing procedure.
It is not recommended practice to initiate IQ testing on first meeting a
client, without first conducting an interview. Likewise, ambitiously presenting
Thematic Apperception Test cards prior to establishing rapport and gathering
basic knowledge of a client through an interview would also be inadvisable.
However, it is not uncommon for some clinics or clinicians to have patients complete pencil-and-paper questionnaires or inventories prior to their first visit or
while they are in the waiting room. Such standard practices allow clinicians to
obtain certain information without spending time in session to do so, or provide
a baseline of the client’s functioning or symptoms (e.g., depressive symptoms),
212 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
prior to the first meeting, which may impact the client’s mood. The clinician will
likely review these responses prior to the first interview and then at least briefly
acknowledge their completion and content in the first meeting.
Conducting a clinical interview prior to formal testing serves many important functions. This first face-to-face contact between the client and professional allows the basic elements of structuring a session to take place (see
following discussion), and allows the development of a positive rapport. Interviews also often reveal new information that was not obtained by the referral
source or phone intake, prior to meeting the client. The course of the evaluation and your approach may change when new information is presented. Perhaps the client was too embarrassed to tell the secretary the true nature of her
complaints, and therefore, what you expect to discuss and what she actually
shares with you in your interview may be quite different. Or, the first interview may reveal that the client is not forthcoming with information, and therefore, standardized or projective testing might be necessary to gather
information that you otherwise would have gleaned from your interview. This
occurrence exemplifies when the clinician as problem solver recognizes the
change (solution verification) and troubleshoots, as necessary.
Interviewing prior to testing is also important to have some understanding
of the client’s way of thinking, feeling, behaving, coping, and responding to different circumstances to help conceptualize responses provided during formal
testing. Having such information will minimize guesswork and assumptions.
So, for many reasons stated, and many more that are probably not stated, it is
recommended that a standard, semistructured, or clinician-structured interview is the first technique used in the assessment process.
During or following the first interview, the clinician is advised to engage
in the problem-solving process again to determine the specifics of the remainder of the assessment. Decisions need to be made about the techniques, tests, or
tools to be used in the assessment, the length of time for the entire evaluation
(number of sessions, time permitted in each session), and who else, if anyone,
will be included or invited to each session besides the client. Even if the assessment is done in a stepwise fashion, meaning that the need for subsequent testing is determined based on results from initial testing, informing the client of
this projection will provide some general idea about the direction the process
will take. Outlining the assessment framework ahead of time allows the clinician to set realistic expectations for the client, the referral source, and him- or
herself, so that everyone can plan accordingly.
Often, new clinicians who have their assessment plans well designed in
their mind innocently forget to do anything other than forage ahead toward
their goal of collecting data! These clinicians forget to check in with their clients
and ask them how comfortable they are with the assessment process. Clients
may have concerns they will not volunteer without being asked, or they could
become fatigued and less present in the session. It is important to remember to
offer breaks during the evaluation process, if you continue beyond a 60- to 90-
minute session, and to check in with the client periodically. Also, remaining
too focused on one’s own plans, procedures, and questions to be asked can result in missing nonverbal behavioral information that could otherwise be easily
obtained through observation.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 213
Neglecting to request client feedback and missing observational data are
even more likely to happen if the clinician’s note-taking process becomes too
involved or distracting. Note-taking helps to maintain accuracy in recording details, but one must be cautious not to allow note-taking to become a barrier or
obstacle between you and the client. In fact, clients often appreciate and feel
more relaxed when clinicians inform them that the notes taken are merely
recordings of information they are providing, rather than the clinician’s analysis and opinions of what is occurring. Of course, this should only be stated if
true.
Goals for the First Interview
In addition to gathering information, clinicians are advised to attend to several
concurrent goals focusing on the clinician-patient relationship.
Establishing trust and a good rapport, socializing the patient to the assessment and therapy process, establishing professional boundaries and a confidential relationship, and a collaborative approach to assessment and treatment are
all critical goals worthy of immediate attention. Meeting these goals begins
with establishing the interview structure and keeping sessions focused; setting
an agenda; discussing confidentiality and gaining informed consent; and using
good therapy skills, such as asking effective questions, periodically soliciting
feedback, demonstrating warmth and genuineness, and being mindful of nonverbal behavior. Each of these topics warrants further discussion.
THE INTERVIEW STRUCTURE Once the general goal (diagnose, describe, predict, etc.) of the intake evaluation has been determined, the format of the interview is decided. Interviews may be highly structured or standardized, such as
interviews guided by the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV (SCIDDSM-IV; First, Gibbon, Spitzer, Williams, & Benjamin, 1997), the Diagnostic
Interview for Children and Adolescents (DICA; Reich, Shayka, & Taibleson,
1991), or an intake form according to the designated practices of an individual
clinic. Semistructured interviews allow clinicians some flexibility in determining the order of questions to be asked, the manner or phraseology to be used in
questioning, and in determining when more in-depth questioning pertaining to
specific topics seems relevant. Unstructured interviews refer to interviews that
are not predetermined in style, length, or specific content. However, interviews
should not truly lack structure in the more general sense of the term. All interviews should have a clear beginning, middle, and end that are evident to the
client and clinician and discussed in the process of setting an agenda.
To begin an initial interview, which is typically the first contact the clinician is having with the patient, proper introductions are important. First, the
clinician briefly states her preferred way to be addressed, and briefly describes
her credentials. Clinicians should also ensure that they are addressing their patients properly by pronouncing their name correctly, and using preferred nicknames or titles. Also, within an introduction, the clinician has the opportunity
to address issues such as time factors and note taking. Stating the allotted time
for the intake evaluation and future sessions, if relevant, begins the process of
establishing the client’s expectations for your work together, aids in structuring
sessions, and maximizes the efficiency of time-use. Informing clients about the
214 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
purpose and content of note taking, as stated earlier, demystifies the interview
process and portrays the clinician’s intention to be collaborative. An introduction might proceed in the following way,
Good morning Mrs. Giunardini. I’m Dr. Smith. I’m a licensed clinical psychologist
and work at the Feeling Good Clinic full-time. Dr. Shilpa, your gynecologist, told
me she met with you, and that the past week has been particularly difficult for you
since you were told that you are pregnant. I am hoping that you are willing to
speak with me for the next 45 minutes to talk about your visit with Dr. Shilpa, and
any difficulties you might be experiencing as a result? . . . My hope is that by the
end of our conversation, I’ll have some ideas about how I might be able to help
you, or offer some suggestions about what services or supports might be available
to make things a bit easier for you. Would that be okay? . . . If you don’t mind, I
will be jotting a few notes down while we speak, just to make sure I don’t forget
important information or details you might share.
In review of this monologue, you might notice that the therapist stated
her general intentions for the assessment session, but was vague in describing
how these goals would be accomplished. Also, the client has not yet had an opportunity to state her goals or expectations for the meeting. If this session continued without attention to these factors, Mrs. Giunardini is likely to be unclear
about the assessment process, may not have an opportunity to express her
needs, and the session may not produce the results necessary for Dr. Smith to
fully develop useful clinical impressions or recommendations, as needed by Dr.
Shilpa. Collaboratively setting an agenda, after briefly exchanging introductions will help to ensure these problems will not arise.
SETTING THE AGENDA Agenda setting is common practice in many types of
therapies, especially cognitive, behavioral, and cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Much like your instructors provide you with syllabi at the beginning of each
course, and perhaps, an outline at the beginning of each lecture, agenda setting in assessment and therapy sessions provides a road map for patients and
clients alike. The difference between your class agenda and agenda-setting in
the context of a patient-professional relationship is that the patient helps to
create the agenda for each session. Clients may have somewhat less influence
on the course of formal assessments compared with therapy sessions, but intake sessions and interviews, usually benefit from collaboratively set agendas.
The agenda is a mutually agreed on schedule, established within the first few
minutes of a session, that delineates how time will be spent and what specific
topics will be discussed.
The process of setting an agenda should be brief. In the first contact with
a client, the clinician should provide a rationale for setting an agenda, explain
that agendas will be set in every encounter, and that sticking to the agenda is
the joint responsibility of the client and professional. Taking this approach to
each session ensures that the client will be an active participant, and that important aspects of assessment or treatment are reinforced, such as assigning,
completing, and reviewing homework. Providing clients with a rationale for
using agendas in each session is imperative, so that the high degree of structure
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 215
and task-focused approach does not have an antithetical impact, such that the
client feels dictated, imposed on, or rushed.
PROVIDING A RATIONALE FOR THE AGENDA In clinicians’ explanations for
agenda setting, several points of information might be conveyed. First, explaining that setting agendas will provide both the client and the therapist with an
understanding of “what to expect” increases the likelihood that proper time is
allocated to topics that are deemed most important, while minimizing waste of
time. If the client needs the clinician to complete medical forms for the client’s
insurance, a request made in the last 5 minutes of a session may have little
chance of being fulfilled on that day. From the clinician’s perspective, agendas
minimize the likelihood that “surprises” will occur at the end of a session. Likewise, a therapist may intend to spend the majority of an assessment session
learning about the patient’s biopsychosocial history, without realizing the client
is pressed to make a time-sensitive decision due to an imminent concern, as in
Mrs. Giunardini’s situation. Setting an agenda allows the clinician and client to
state their intentions or goals and negotiate which goals are priorities. In testing
sessions during the course of an assessment, and in early therapy sessions, the
clinician generally takes more responsibility for establishing the agenda.
WHAT TO INCLUDE IN THE AGENDA When the professional-patient relationship is strictly focused on evaluation, rather than therapy, the agenda is somewhat more straightforward for each meeting. The clinician would first state the
amount of time allotted for the day’s meeting, and then proceed by outlining
the proposed structure for the beginning or continuation of the evaluation process. The clinician might first plan to have the client complete brief pencil-andpaper questionnaires to assess mood, frequency of symptoms experienced in
the past week, or other similar behaviors, followed by a 30-minute interview.
The clinician might then explain that he or she will be doing a series of short
tests with the client (Wechsler Memory Scales), and then plan to have the
client complete some computerized testing prior to ending the testing session.
Toward the end of the session, the clinician might plan to discuss questionnaires, self-monitoring, report-by-other inventories, or other assessment measures that he or she requests for the patient to complete prior to the next
session, or have a family complete by that time. The last 5 minutes or so might
then be reserved to allow the client or clinician to ask any outstanding questions that were not addressed earlier. In subsequent sessions, the first agenda
item might consist of reviewing homework previously assigned, asking followup questions to the preceding session’s evaluation, or responding to new concerns raised by the patient, the referral source, or a third-party contributor to
the data collection. Ideally, the client would have an opportunity to affirm this
plan and add or negotiate any additional requests for time use for that day. Take
a moment and imagine the script that might have transpired between Dr. Smith
and Mrs. Giunardini in setting the agenda for the intake evaluation.
OBTAINING CONSENT AND DISCUSSING CONFIDENTIALITY Clinicians old and
new often underestimate the importance and value of obtaining consent,
discussing confidentiality, and clarifying the goal and use for a comprehensive
216 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
assessment. We hope that the following discussion will be persuasive enough
that you will not become one of “those” clinicians!
Although these three components of an introductory session seem routine
and standard to the clinician, they may not be familiar to the patient. So, aside
from the ethical and legal responsibilities, if attended to sufficiently, these three
core components of an intake session can help develop good rapport and open
communication between professionals and their patients.
OBTAINING CONSENT Gaining consent for assessment or treatment implies
that clinicians have thoroughly explained the purpose, goals, and objectives of
the assessment or treatment, potential client risks and benefits for participation,
who will have access to information obtained or produced from the assessment
(limits of confidentiality), consequences to discontinuation or nonparticipation
in the assessment or treatment process, and alternative options to those recommended by the clinician. Depending on the setting of the assessment (school,
private practice, community mental health center, other), whether the assessment is self-requested, initiated by the treating therapist, or a third party, and
the purpose of the assessment, the informed consent process may be more or
less formal. Formal informed consent is obtained through discussion and signing of informed consent forms that are often kept in the patient’s file, copied for
the client, and possibly sent to the referral source or intended recipient of the
evaluation report. If other parties are not involved, some clinicians may opt to
discuss the issues relating to informed consent verbally and accept the patient’s
verbal consent to pursue the evaluation, treatment, or both. When informal
consent is obtained, clinicians should always document that verbal consent was
obtained for the recommended course of the assessment or treatment. For clinicians in training, it is more likely that formal consent will be used.
When done properly, meaning that the clinician discusses each aspect relevant to informed consent, the client gains an increased understanding of what
to expect from the evaluator and the evaluation, and can ask questions that
might otherwise not be realized or addressed. Clinicians who routinely place informed consent on the top of their agenda may also reduce the risk of forgetting
to address issues of confidentiality or having a client become frustrated with an
assessment process that might differ from their self-created expectations.
To obtain informed consent, clinicians must describe the purpose and nature of the assessment. This introduction to the assessment often provides a
perfect opportunity to first have clients explain their understanding of why an
assessment is needed, and to give corrective feedback, if necessary. The clinician might ask, “What is your understanding of why Dr. Shilpa recommended
for you to visit me today?” In response, clinicians can correct misconceptions,
and then begin discussion by communicating their general goals for clients,
such as to understand their strengths and difficulties, which will allow them (or
the referral source) to provide recommendations to help the client improve
day-to-day functioning (coping with problems, reducing anxiety, “feeling better,” or whatever relates to the purpose of the assessment). More specific goals
should then be addressed, such as stating that the focus will be on trying to
identify the client’s confusion and memory problems.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 217
In Mrs. Giunardini’s case, the clinician’s goals were to understand why
Mrs. Giunardini was experiencing extreme distress relating to the pregnancy,
evaluate whether she had the resources to cope with this distress and make
necessary effective decisions, and provide recommendations to help her
through her perceived crisis. Dr. Smith was likely to modify her description of
these goals when stating them to Mrs. Giunardini, so that they would be appropriate to her understanding and sensitive to her situation. As illustrated, providing general, and then a more specific rationale helps the client to recognize
that an assessment is something that is done for clients, and with clients, rather
than to them.
Discussion of the purpose and procedures for the assessment also provides the opportunity for the clinician to highlight the collaborative nature of
the assessment, such that the patient is the expert in his or her experiences,
and the clinician is the expert in assessment or (insert the focus
of your work relating to the client’s difficulties, memory, anger management,
anxiety, helping people cope with losses or life changes). By addressing the
purpose, goals, and objectives of the assessment, the procedures to be used
(testing, biofeedback, interview), and the teamwork approach to be taken,
clients may already begin to develop appropriate expectations for the assessment process and feel more at ease.
Mrs. Giunardini immediately expressed relief when the assessment process was described, and attention to the uniqueness of her situation was acknowledged. Her initial misconception was that Dr. Shilpa thought she was
“out of control” and “losing it,” because she had cried in the doctor’s office. Although she endorsed feeling this way at times, she was concerned about having
these fears validated by a professional.
In discussion of the purpose and goals of an assessment, the clinician explains how the information will be used, and possible associated risks or benefits. In a forensic evaluation, the results may not necessarily be helpful to the
client, depending on the outcome. The client should know exactly what the
possible consequences are that could result from the data revealed in an evaluation requested by the opposing attorney. If the evaluation is related to a child
custody suit, and a Rorschach inkblot test reveals psychiatric instability, poor
judgment and impulse control in a parent, this information must still be conveyed to the referral source. To allow the evaluation, the client must be aware
of the risks associated with it prior to giving consent, and agree to the testing
under those known circumstances. Another potential risk of a clinical assessment might include the tendency for some people to become upset when questioned about sensitive or emotionally painful topics. In these circumstances,
the discussion of risks and benefits at the outset will help to foster rapport between the professional and the patient, rather than allowing the consequences
to ensue without prior warning. It also becomes more apparent that the relationship between the professional and patient in the context of an evaluation
or assessment can differ significantly from that of the professional-patient relationship in the context of therapy. The clinician who is only providing an evaluation is not designated as the person who will ultimately guide the patient
through the process of managing or alleviating his problems.
218 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
LIMITS OF CONFIDENTIALITY Patients may automatically assume that confidentiality laws bind a professional-patient relationship. In many cases, however, there are limits to these boundaries. In hospital settings, patient
evaluations often become part of the patient’s medical record—a document
viewed by many health care professionals. Evaluations conducted at the request of school counselors might become a part of the student’s academic
record, and surely parents may gain access to students’ evaluations as their
legal guardians. Forensic evaluations have specific purposes and requirements for sharing such documents between plaintiffs and defendants as well.
Given these limitations to confidentiality, and many other circumstances
where boundaries are less clear, such as with insurance companies, clinicians
are obligated to inform clients of the scope and limits of the confidentiality
they can offer.
Contrary to the expectation that all information is confidential, some
clients fear or expect that their evaluation will be available to inquiring
spouses, family members, collaborative medical practitioners, or other parties.
Assuring clients of their rights and protections within the professional relationship may build trust and give permission to the client to be honest and forthcoming with pertinent information he might otherwise have withheld for fear
of repercussions. Clinicians who discuss the bounds of confidentiality and the
clients’ related concerns or questions can clarify misconceptions, set realistic
expectations, and establish the parameters of the relationship immediately, so
that client assumptions do not negatively impact the assessment.
RELEASE OF INFORMATION At some point during the assessment process, the
clinician may wish to speak with the client’s family, spouse, friends, teachers,
coworkers, or other health practitioners to gather additional information or
medical or mental health records. Likewise, the clinician will want to exchange
new information with medical or mental health professionals involved in the
patient’s care. Given the bounds of confidentiality, and supposing that the
client was originally ensured that information would not be shared with anyone other than the referral source, simply calling any persons in reference to
the client would breach confidentiality because they would automatically
know the client was being seen by a mental health professional. Clinicians must
present another consent form to the client to gain permission to have any interaction or dialogue with other persons. This consent form, often called a “release of information” form, specifies who will be contacted, what information
will be requested, what information will be shared, the purpose of the information exchange, and the time frame for which the release form is viable. If clinicians carefully review with clients the information they want to disclose to the
persons they contact, the clinicians can then honor any restrictions that their
clients impose. Enlisting feedback from clients in this process is both required
and critical to maintaining a good working alliance.
In the case of Mrs. Giunardini, Dr. Smith obtained her informed consent
for the evaluation, a written consent form to release information to Dr. Shilpa,
even though she was the referral source, and a written consent form permitting
Dr. Shilpa to release information to Dr. Smith. A thorough rationale for re-
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 219
questing this permission accompanied the discussion of the forms presented.
Mrs. Giunardini had the opportunity to ask questions and feel comfortable
with the psychologist’s responses prior to signing these forms.
Data Gathering in the Interview: Asking Questions
A well-formed and strategically placed question is the clinician’s primary tool
for gathering information in the interview. Competence as an interviewer depends on one’s mastery of the use of questions. Using open-ended versus
closed-ended questioning while maintaining focus and control of the interview,
knowing how to prompt clients to provide more depth in their responses, and
being able to ask difficult questions requires much practice. Considering the
sensitive nature of Mrs. Giunardini’s problems, one can understand why a delicate style is needed, at times, and directive questioning and feedback is necessary at others. The following tips introduce you to these important skills. You
can practice these skills with anyone you know in the context of daily conversation—assuming you will not be asking clinical questions, or engaging in therapeutic conversation that could be construed as leading to a dual relationship!
CLOSED-ENDED, MULTIPLE-CHOICE, AND OPEN-ENDED QUESTIONS Before
proceeding, answer the following sets of questions for yourself; preferably,
write your answers on a piece of scrap paper. Set 1: Did you have a good day?
Have you had at least eight hours of sleep each night, for the past week? Do you
like classical music? Are you feeling sad? Set 2: Do you have difficulty getting
along with others or do you have a lot of friends? Are you happy with your
graduate program or do you wish you had chosen another field of study? Do
these questions seem simple, pointless, or curious to you? Set 3: How do you
describe your energy level in the past week? What activities do you enjoy for
recreation? What is your approach to writing term papers?
Review your responses and give some thought to any patterns you might
notice within each set. The first set of questions represents closed-ended questions, or questions that require responses of only one or a few words. “Yes, I’ve
had a good day.” “No, I have not had eight hours of sleep each night in the past
seven days.” “Yes, I like classical music.” “No, I do not feel sad.” Imagine having
a conversation in which the dialogue consisted of such exchanges. If you were
asking the questions, how much information would you have acquired about
each topic area? Most likely, you have not learned much more than specific responses to what you have asked.
Closed-ended questions are restrictive in the information requested and
obtained. Also, the questioner or clinician has to work hard to continue this
line of questioning when the responses are brief and not particularly informative. Each question could be followed up with another question, and if the subsequent question is also closed-ended, similar responses will be elicited. For
example, “No, I have not had eight hours of sleep each day for the past week”;
might be followed by asking if the individual has had more or less than that
amount. Again, a one-word response would suffice to answer the question, but
little would be known about the individual’s sleep habits or patterns. One can
almost imagine the volley of questions and answers that would be exchanged,
220 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
using this inquisitive style. Such questions are typically asked in gaining a patient’s medical history: “Have you ever had surgery? Have you ever tested positively for Hepatitis C?”
The second set of questions represents what we call, “multiple-choice
questioning.” The questioner has intentionally or unintentionally designated
the appropriate responses available to the person being asked. For example, the
question, “Do you have difficulty getting along with others or do you have a lot
of friends?” almost forces the respondent to fit into one of the two predetermined categories of either having difficulty getting along with others, or having
a lot of friends. This question presupposes that the person being asked has not
just moved into a new area where he has not yet met many people although he
believes he can make friends easily and get along well with others. Likewise,
the following question presupposes that individuals could not be happy they selected their chosen field of study and not be happy with their program, “Are
you happy with your graduate program or do you wish you had chosen another
field of study?” To give a different answer, the respondent needs to contradict
the questioner’s question: “Actually, these questions do not seem simple, pointless, or curious to me. Rather, these questions seem to be unrelated to one another.” From our experience as clinical supervisors, clinicians who ask many
multiple-choice questions do so for several possible reasons: They have a specific hypothesis about what is going on with the client, and they wish to inquire about this hypothesis; they are concerned they are not communicating
their thoughts or questions clearly to the client; or they lack confidence in the
questions they are asking, and therefore, they might believe that providing possible responses will help the client understand them better. They have not
learned and practiced the skill of asking questions that provide more comprehensive responses; or perhaps there is another reason for this behavior. Asking
an open-ended question, such as, “Why do you ask so many closed-ended
questions?” might provide a few additional reasons!
The third set of questions exemplifies open-ended questions. To respond
to any of these questions requires information derived strictly from the person asked the question, without influence from the questioner about possible
responses that could be given. Furthermore, it is likely that more in-depth responses will be solicited by open-ended questions because the respondent will
not have been given inadvertent guidelines regarding the amount of detail
sought. Answering the question, “How do you describe your energy level in
the past week?” could result in the following responses, or a variety of others,
“I have had a lot of energy this week because I finally was able to catch up on
sleep after two weeks of sight-seeing”; or “I have had very little energy due to
the heat outside and my recent decision to give up caffeine.” These sample responses illustrate how open-ended questions elicit unbiased or uninfluenced
responses to questions, while also providing additional, possibly useful, information. Asking, “what activities do you enjoy for recreation?” instead of “Do
you like to play baseball?” will achieve the goal of gathering more information
from the respondent. Likewise, asking, “What is your approach to writing
term papers?” versus, “Do you make outlines before writing term papers?”
will result in a more comprehensive reply. Many clinicians begin their intake
interviews by asking patients, “What brought you in to see me today?” or
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 221
“Why have you decided to seek therapy now (versus 3 months ago, one year
ago, etc.)?”
COMPARING OPEN-ENDED, CLOSED-ENDED, AND MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTIONS The three styles of questioning—closed-ended, multiple-choice, and
open-ended—each have pros and cons. Which type of question would most
likely be incorporated into a structured interview? Unstructured interview?
Semistructured interview? After reading on, you should be able to answer
these questions.
Asking open-ended questions helps clinicians gain more information from
clients by “giving them the floor” to speak freely about topics raised. Openended questions tend to direct the focus of an interview on clients’ stories and
personal information, rather than the clinician’s checklist of information
sought. The result is a more conversational style of interviewing and responding, and possibly more voluntary information and self-disclosures that inform
clinicians about subjects not previously considered. The drawback to asking
only open-ended questions is the risk that an interview can lose focus by allowing loquacious clients to speak endlessly about seemingly irrelevant topics,
or that only a few questions are answered within a predetermined time.
Closed-ended questions increase the likelihood that many questions can
be answered in a short time, but more limited information is likely to result.
Asking only closed-ended questions is likely to tax clinicians, unless the questions are gleaned from a structured interview. Likewise, interrogating patients
with mostly close-ended questions makes some patients feel rushed, not understood, or surveyed, rather than interviewed. Multiple-choice questions are
least desirable as part of most interviews, unless responses need to be standardized for the purpose of comparing answers to the same questions across individuals. Such questions tend to influence respondents’ answers because
automatic responses are seemingly stifled by the options presented.
Ideally, semistructured or unstructured interviews consist of a reasonable
combination of both open-ended and closed-ended questions. Beginning with
open-ended questions provides the greatest amount of unbiased information,
and then responses can be followed up with more specific closed-ended questions. Closed-ended questions typically dominate written questionnaires and
are less likely to be exclusively useful in semistructured or unstructured interviews. Multiple-choice questioning is only advisable when the questions are
derived with some basis for restricting the response options, such as in structured interviews.
Now that you have considered the differences among the three styles of
questioning, for practice, try to create open-ended questions in place of the
closed-ended questions to solicit more comprehensive responses. Next, create
closed-ended questions to focus an open-ended question for which you would
like to obtain a specific answer. Lastly, think about how your answers to the
multiple-choice questions might have differed, if restrictions were not imposed
on your responses. Throughout the rest of the day, focus on asking open-ended
questions in your daily conversations, since this type of question is typically the
most difficult for new clinicians to incorporate into their semistructured or unstructured interviews.
222 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
The questions that follow illustrate some of the questions Dr. Smith used
to obtain information reported in the background/history section of Mrs. Giunardini’s clinical report. The excerpts follow the introductory portion of the initial assessment, where consents were obtained and the client’s initial questions
were answered. It is also important to note that these are just samples of questions, not the interview in its entirety. Questions were not asked in this order.
Some responses are provided to exemplify the types of answers given to openended or closed-ended questions.
Dr. Smith (Dr. S.): Mrs. Giunardini, although I have some information from
Dr. Shilpa, it would be helpful if you could tell me in your own
words what brought you in to see me today, and how you are hoping I
can help you?
Mrs. Giunardini (Mrs. G.): My life fell apart in the last few weeks. I’m so confused; I don’t know where to start. I need help figuring out how to put my
life back together, if I even can. My husband left me. If that’s not bad
enough, I’m 2.5 months pregnant and he doesn’t even know. I have two
kids, no job, and no husband. I don’t have anywhere to turn. I don’t know
what to do.
Dr. S.: It sounds like a lot has changed for you recently, and very quickly.
Since there is so much going on for you, we obviously won’t be able to
talk about everything today, so I think it is important for us to agree on
what is most important to talk about. Where would you like to start
today?
Mrs. G.: Well, the job, my husband—those things happened—I have to deal
with that, but I don’t expect anything’s going to change about over night.
I’m really most scared about this pregnancy. I don’t know what to
do. . . . I only have about 1 week to figure out if I am going to keep this
baby or not. I can’t imagine having this baby on my own, but then again,
how could I not have this baby?
Dr. S.: You can’t imagine having the baby, but you can’t imagine not having
this baby. (Reflective Statement.) Tell me more about the thoughts you are
having regarding this dilemma. (Prompt.)
Later in the session . . .
Dr. S.: You said that your husband just left you a few weeks ago. (Prompt: Reflective Statement.)
Mrs. G.: Yes, it came out of left field—he totally took me by surprise.
Dr. S.: Mrs. Giunardini, please you tell me about your marriage, beginning
with when and how you met Anthony, and what life has been like for you
since then? Here you will note that Dr. Smith asked a combination of questions to
get Mrs. Giunardini started in providing some background information about her
relationships. Dr. Smith needed some specific information regarding the timelength of the relationship, and the remaining questions were open-ended, but with
some direction to keep her focused. This question resulted in much of the information contained in the social/family/religious history section of the report.
Dr. S.: Have you had any other intimate or committed relationships, with
someone other than your husband?
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 223
Mrs. G.: Yes, just one man before I married Anthony. As evident here, the closedended question only resulted in the specific information requested. As such, a
prompt (i.e., “If you don’t mind, tell me more about this relationship”) was needed
to gain more details.
Dr. S.: We’ve spent some time talking about your relationship with Anthony,
the birth of your children, and how you have been spending most of your
days in the past few years. (Summary Statement.) Let’s take a step a little
further backward. How would you describe your family members (parents, brothers) and what it was like growing up in your household?
When we first began today, you told me that one of your concerns is
that you have no job, and now, no husband to provide for you. It would be
helpful to switch gears and focus on this for a few minutes so that I can
better understand your situation, is that okay with you? (Rationale provided, and feedback solicited from client.) How far did you go in school?
(Closed-ended question.) Have you ever had any jobs outside your home?
(Closed-ended.) Tell me about them. (Prompt.) Have you given any thought
to what type of a job you might like to have, if you decided to pursue
work outside your home?
Keeping the Interview Going: Prompts, Reflective Statements, Summary
Statements, and Transitions
Questions obviously provide excellent means to getting patients to talk about
their problems, strengths, weaknesses, background, or most topics suggested by
the clinician. However, firing a straight line of questions at a client for 45 minutes or longer would get very tiresome and even grueling for most patients and
clinicians.
Prompts, reflective statements, and summary statements help to keep the
dialogue in a session moving along, without the patient feeling interrogated.
Using such techniques also reduces multiple-choice questioning and therapists’
tendencies to assume too much about what clients are thinking. Also, these
techniques help clinicians keep clients focused on important topics by emphasizing the portions of client responses that are most pertinent to the clinical issues at hand.
Prompts are brief, gentle suggestive comments made by therapists to encourage clients to provide more detail about topics already initiated, to (re)direct clients to focus on particular aspects of their stories, or to elicit more
complete responses. A client responding to the question, “What types of physical activity do you enjoy?” with the answer, “All types,” might be prompted for
more detail by the therapist’s incomplete remark, “Such as . . . ?” Other statements commonly used as prompts include, “tell me more . . .”; and “go on . . .”
Consider the excerpts from the preceding interview; can you identify the
prompts made by Dr. Smith? In addition to these generic statements, reflective
statements also serve as useful prompts during assessment and therapy sessions.
Reflective statements are statements made by clinicians that are essentially verbatim remarks initially made by the client moments earlier. These
words are repeated to ensure the client that the therapist heard what was said,
to prompt the client to expand or clarify what was meant, or to magnify the
importance of the comment. In the preceding dialogue, Dr. Smith reiterated
224 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
what Mrs. Giunardini stated regarding her dilemma about having or not having
her baby. This signifies the importance of her comment, as Dr. Smith directs her
to talk more about this subject.
Summary statements are offered periodically by clinicians to make sure
they understand their clients’ reports accurately, to verbally affirm they are listening, or to gently interrupt clients’ speech to ask for clarification, change
subjects, or redirect the focus of the discussion. The following script is Mrs.
Giunardini’s response to Dr. Smith’s question, “Tell me about yourself, and
what your life has been like since you met Anthony.”
I am a 32-year-old mom with 2 kids. I lived with my parents until I got married at
20. My husband and I moved into a little apartment, but then we couldn’t pay the
rent. We moved back in with my parents for a few years. We had kids pretty
quickly and my mom helped out a lot. Anyway, I guess I went right from being a
kid to being a mom. My kids are now 11 and 9, both boys. My mom is really sick
now and I am helping my dad out with taking care of her. She has emphysema.
Between my kids and my parents, I really haven’t had much time for myself. I go
running every morning, but that’s about it. Usually, I’m just rushing from soccer
games to baseball practices for the boys, and then to my parents’ house to cook for
them. I guess I think of myself as a good mom and a good daughter, but I guess I
haven’t been a very good wife. I mean, I didn’t used to think I was a bad wife, but
I guess my husband thinks I am.
Dr. S.: From what I’m hearing Mrs. Giunardini, your life for the past 12 years
has focused on taking care of your husband, your children, and your parents, and those responsibilities have pretty much defined who you are.
You’ve managed to take a little time to exercise each day, but otherwise, it
doesn’t sound like you have had much time to dedicate to yourself. Now
that your husband has left you, it sounds like you’re beginning to question
your identity a bit?
Dr. Smith’s summarized what Mrs. Giunardini had told her by using her own
words, and adding a slight interpretation of what she thought Mrs. Giunardini
was thinking. The statement added to the end of the summary provides a
prompt for Mrs. Giunardini to express her thoughts regarding her current situation and her need for help in therapy. Of course, Dr. Smith’s decision to focus
on this aspect of Mrs. Giunardini was made in the context of the rest of the interview. Other clinicians might have chosen to inquire about other aspects of
her self-report, depending on what their clinical hypothesis was or the information they deemed necessary to obtain.
Topic transitions present a common difficulty for practitioners-intraining. Students are usually concerned that switching subjects might be perceived as abrupt, rude, or unnatural. They have difficulty interrupting clients
because they do not want their clients to infer that they are disinterested in
what they have to say, or that what they have to say is unimportant. This
common concern leads new clinicians to wait for an opportunity or segue that
may or may not come. To accomplish all that is necessary in an assessment interview, clinicians need to maintain some control of the session and guide the
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 225
interview according to the agenda set. We have several suggestions for making transitions in session.
First, in the process of setting an agenda for the interview and shaping expectations for the session, the clinician might inform the client that many topics will need to be covered. A statement such as, “During the interview, I will
be asking you a variety of questions. Some will be specific to your reason for
being here today, and some may be more general questions that I typically ask
of people when I first meet them. So I need you to bear with me if my questions jump around a bit.” Second, if a client is very talkative and seems to be
providing much irrelevant detail in response to questions after the key information was provided, the clinician might gently interrupt and state the following, “Mr. Jones, it sounds like discussing this topic has brought back a lot of
memories for you that are very interesting. I would like to hear more about
this, but I am hoping it is okay with you if we discuss this again at a later time,
to make sure that we can cover all the things we need to discuss today. Would
that be okay with you? Is there anything else about this topic that you think I
should know right now?”
Many times a loquacious client is not the cause of difficulty in transitioning from one topic to another. In fact, clients who tend to give short answers, or
those answering mostly closed-ended questions, might present a bigger difficulty to new practitioners. If questions are answered concisely and without
more information than requested, little is offered for the clinician to reflect or
transition to the next topic. The third suggestion to aid in this transition is for
clinicians to acknowledge the switch in subject matter. In assessment of depression, a clinician might change subjects as follows:
I’ve asked you about your sleeping, eating, energy level, and physical feelings of
tension. I’m going to switch gears for a moment, if that’s okay with you.
(Client nods.) Besides having a lot of worries, oftentimes people who are feeling
down about themselves or their situations also report feelings of worthlessness or
helplessness. Do you find yourself feeling this way at times?
In this transitional statement, the clinician summarized the recent portion of
the interview, informed the client of the direction the interviewing was going,
and asked permission to make this change. Likewise, if a client had provided a
lot of detail within one uninterrupted response, the clinician might be concerned that the opportunity to ask for more information about the beginning
portion of the response was lost. Simply summarizing what the client reported
will validate the information obtained, will then allow the clinician to return to
an earlier topic. Dr. Smith might have replied to Mrs. Giunardini’s description
about herself and her life by making the same summary statement provided
earlier, and then continuing as follows:
From what I’m hearing, Mrs. Giunardini, your life for the past 12 years has focused on taking care of your husband, your children, and your parents, and those
responsibilities have pretty much defined who you are. Is that right? (Intentionally asking a closed-ended question simply to seek confirmation.) You
mentioned earlier that your mom has severe emphysema, and you are caring for
226 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
her as well. Can we go back to that for a moment? Tell me more about what that
has been like for you and your marriage.
The two preceding examples demonstrate that noting the abrupt change
makes it less awkward, and relieves the clinician of having to find the perfect
moment or easy way to slide in the questions that do not otherwise fit into
normal conversation.
Difficult Questions
Even more challenging for new clinicians is the task of asking questions about
difficult or seemingly taboo topics such as suicide, homicide, sexual orientation, sexual functioning and sexual practices, drugs and alcohol, and hallucinations and delusions.
Many practitioners-in-training neglect to raise these topics in initial interviews; anecdotally, the most common reasons for this include “It didn’t come
up”; “It didn’t seem relevant to the reason the client was referred”; “The patient
didn’t give me any reason to believe that suicide (homicide, drugs/alcohol, hallucinations, delusions, etc.) is something to be concerned about with him”; “I
didn’t get a chance to ask.” The fact is, clinicians most likely will not be given a
chance to ask these questions, but rather, need to create the opportunity to ask
these questions. In keeping with the principle of forming clients’ expectations
for the interview, as described earlier, simply telling clients that some questions
to be asked are routinely asked of all patients will decrease personalization of
the questions.
Another technique that facilitates inquiry about difficult questions is that
of prefacing questions with statements that suggest others sometimes have
thoughts, feelings, or behaviors consistent with what will be asked. Doing so
normalizes the individual’s experiences, rather than creating suspicion or embarrassment for the client, as to why the clinician asked. Dr. Smith addressed the
question of suicide with Mrs. Giunardini as follows, “Sometimes when people
are feeling hopeless or helpless about their circumstances, they can feel trapped
and at a loss for what to do. When feeling this way, some people have thoughts
about hurting or killing themselves; have you ever had any similar thoughts?”
This closed-ended question will likely result in a “yes” or “no” answer. Dr. Smith
would then respond with more specific questions, if necessary. Suggesting that
others have experienced suicidal thoughts gives permission to clients to reveal
they have also had these thoughts, without feeling unique or deviant.
Questions of sexual orientation, sexual functioning (interest in sexual activity; pleasure gained or difficulty with sexual functioning; menopause), frequency and carefulness of sexual activity, and other sexual practices are often
more difficult for new clinicians or practitioners-in-training to ask than they
are difficult for clients to answer. Surprisingly, many physicians and other
health care professionals do not inquire about this facet of patients’ quality of
life either, unless it directly relates to patients’ chief complaints. Assuming that
reasonably good rapport has been established and clinicians are sensitive to the
background, history, and reason for the assessment, asking questions about
sexual functioning does not need to be threatening to either party. In fact, some
patients are thrilled that someone has asked them about this aspect of their life.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 227
Clients may have had concerns or questions they were not sure were appropriate to address, or may positively receive such questions simply because
they appreciate their clinicians’ sensitivity to personal preferences and individual differences. As such, the best way to approach such topics is to do so in a
straightforward manner, with the same tone, intonation, and comfort level
used to inquire about less seemingly taboo subjects, such as sleeping habits.
Here, some cognitive restructuring might be necessary for clinicians to recognize that asking persons about depressed thoughts or worst fears is equally as
personal as asking about sexual behavior!
The same principles and techniques recommended for inquiry about
sexual functioning and suicidal thoughts are also useful for asking about drug
and alcohol use, deviant behavior, arrest histories, and hallucinations and
delusions. Sensitive, yet direct questioning about these topics decreases the
awkwardness that could otherwise result from trying to slip these questions
in or indirectly assessing these aspects of clients’ past or present behaviors. A
common barrier to initiating these questions, besides feeling uncomfortable
with the practice, is making the assumption that the behavior or topic is not
relevant for a particular client. Therefore, asking questions directly minimizes
the chance that the clinician will be corrected for misattributions or assumptions that could lead the client to distrust the therapist. The moral of this
discussion also serves as a word of caution: Do Not Assume Anything About Anyone!!! Aside from the professional and ethical responsibility to be culturally
sensitive to clients, and to minimize biases and stereotype-based judgments,
clinicians are often surprised by the unassuming middle-aged professional
who reveals a long-standing habit of marijuana use, or the young law student
who reveals delusional thinking or non-drug-related hallucinations.
Ending the Interview
As the time draws near the end of interview sessions, clinicians are encouraged
to provide at least a 10- to 15-minute notification to clients to ensure that time
is allotted for proper closure. Clinicians may want to ask if any pertinent topics
have not been addressed, so that clients have the opportunity to fill in any
blanks they perceive, or initiate discussion they had not approached earlier. Clinicians might find it beneficial to ask the question, “Is there anything that I
haven’t asked you that perhaps I should have?”
Within this closing time frame, clinicians should also review data
they gathered to ensure they covered all aspects of their client’s life, relevant
to the chief complaint. Clinicians are encouraged to ask themselves if they inquired about all domains of the biopsychosocial model, including current and
developmental perspectives; the topography (stimuli, responses, consequences) of the problematic behavior and adaptive or maladaptive coping efforts, and information across situations and settings. Permission should be
verbally requested for clinicians to contact their clients, if further questions
arise in reviewing interview and assessment materials. Finally, clients should
be given an additional opportunity to ask questions, after clinicians review
the assessment process and the remaining steps of the assessment process
to follow.
228 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Collecting Additional Information
Once the assessment interview is completed, clinicians must review data
gained from the session(s) to ensure completion of material and to evaluate
hypotheses originally generated. At this point, clinicians continue with the
problem-solving process to evaluate what hypotheses about their clients were
supported or unsupported, and to reevaluate their goals and possible obstacles.
Using the brainstorming techniques in the generation-of-alternatives phase
of problem solving, clinicians should consider what additional information
or from what additional sources should confirming or disconfirming information be sought. Clinicians need to consider the possible utility of incorporating
other assessment techniques, informants, methods of evaluation, or time
points to complete the assessment to answer the overall referral question. Review of the methods and practices of assessment techniques described in
Chapter 7, such as observation, projective and objective testing, will remind
readers of some options that are available.
Drawing Conclusions and Giving Feedback
The assessment concludes with development of conclusions or recommendations based on the information that has been gathered. The next procedural
step is to use that information for feedback to relevant parties. Providing feedback is essential to completing an assessment. The information derived from an
evaluation is only as good as the evaluator’s ability to convey the essence of the
individual’s functioning to those who requested the evaluation, and to the patient, if relevant. The results and impressions from a formal assessment are
usually communicated in the form of a written report or a summary report,
and verbal feedback.
The Written Report
Where and to whom a report goes depends largely on who requested the evaluation in the first place. The main three scenarios for report delivery include
providing written feedback to (a) another treating nonpsychologist professional
who requested the assessment to aid in the care of the patient (physician,
school, courts or legal representative), (b) the client or the client’s parents (in
the case of minors), (c) the clinician’s own records, if the evaluation was intended to aid the clinician in the patient’s treatment planning, and (d) to another psychologist or mental health professional who does not conduct the type
of assessment required for this client.
Referrals requested by other professionals to aid in their treatments or
care of patients, obviously require formal reports with details about the assessment conducted, tests, inventories and questionnaires administered, diagnoses,
clinical impressions, and recommendations, if relevant. To release such a report, clients must provide informed consent and appropriate releases of information forms, as discussed earlier. These forms are required even if the referral
source is the reason the client ended up in your office.
When providing an evaluation for another service provider, it is wise to
clarify with the referral source which of you will provide the patient with direct feedback. This should be determined prior to evaluating the client, so that
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 229
this information can be incorporated in the informed consent and subsequent
patient-evaluator discussions. In many cases, nonpsychology professionals appreciate their psychology colleagues conducting the feedback session and answering necessary questions, since such questions are likely to be beyond their
expertise. In other cases, the psychological evaluation was conducted as part of
a greater multidisciplinary assessment, and therefore, it might not be in the patient’s best interest to receive partial information separate from other clinical
feedback. Because feedback is critical, everyone’s roles and functions must be
clearly determined. Most importantly, psychologists have an ethical obligation
to ensure proper use of clinical assessment outcome data, and responsible care
for their clients.
Some referral sources recommend that clients seek evaluations to aid in
their own search for care. A physician might suggest to a client that the difficulties she is reporting about doing the schoolwork in her adult learning program
might signify learning problems. The physician might then suggest that a psychologist could evaluate her for a possible learning disorder; in which case, recommendations may be available to facilitate her success in school. The patient is
technically the end-user or end-recipient of the assessment in this case, not the
referral person. It is most likely not appropriate to provide the client with a detailed report because technical information could easily be misinterpreted or
misused, and possibly be harmful. In this scenario, it is likely that clinicians
would provide the client with a brief version, or summary, of the findings with
specific recommendations. The evaluator would maintain the formal report in
the client’s record. A summary might include a list of the tests conducted and
what their general purposes are, a diagnosis, a summary of clinical impressions,
and a detailed list of recommendations. Clients can always choose to have a
complete formal report sent to another professional at a later date. Formal reports, accompanied by appropriate releases of information forms, are sent directly from one professional to another. In the case previously mentioned, the
client may decide to have a report sent to her primary caregiver (referral
source), adult learning program, or guidance counselor, or not to send anyone a
report and independently follow up on the evaluator’s recommendations.
In any case, it is never good practice, nor ethical to provide clients or untrained (nonpsychological) professionals with raw data from evaluations, or in
many cases, numbers (test results) that are not easily understandable without
some sophistication and written and verbal explanation. Likewise, testing and
assessment reports should not be given to patients without providing proper
verbal feedback and giving the client the opportunity to ask questions, clarify
understanding, and discuss the findings with the qualified mental health professional. Verbal feedback will be discussed in more detail later.
Tips for Successful Report Writing
To be most useful to professionals and laypersons, reports should be clearly
written, logical, well organized, and user friendly. An assessment course, supervisors, and practice will provide you with various report models and development of your own report structure. The following tips are based on years
of review of helpful and unhelpful reports, reports by seasoned professionals,
and reports by clinicians-in-training. These tips apply to most types of written
report, regardless of the report recipient, referral question, format, or template used.
Some recommendations might seem to be incredibly obvious statements,
but we mention them here because we have come across more than a few reports that led us to believe that even what we consider obvious should not be
taken for granted. Reports should always be proofread and checked for spelling and
grammar errors. Yes, we have received professional reports that did not met
these basic criteria. Reports that minimize professional jargon, or psychology vocabulary that can be replaced by simple layperson terms, are easier to read and
understand and will be more helpful to most audiences. Overall, the language in
reports should be intelligently simple and not reflect heavy use of a thesaurus.
The structure of the report can be more easily followed when evaluators
use headings to guide readers through the report, or allow them to skip to specific sections of interest easily. Mrs. Giunardini’s report provides an example of
headings that might be appropriate for a clinical intake assessment. Other headings were discussed earlier in this chapter. While headings help organize a report, keeping report lengths within reasonable limits is also important. We
cannot provide an ideal length of report because this will vary depending on
the referral question, the depth of the assessment, the comprehensiveness of
the evaluation conducted, and the complexity of the client. Yet, while writing,
it is prudent to try to get to the point quickly and include only relevant information.
Consistent with the advice provided in the problem-solving model of clinical decision making, the content of reports should focus on facts and data, rather
than assumptions. A written report should provide the reader with knowledge
about how the results (what tests were given) and clinical impressions were obtained; readers should be able to clearly differentiate data from interpretations and
impressions. Clinicians are cautioned to be very selective about raw data that they
incorporate into a written report. Often, the raw data (numbers, test scores) are
of limited value to nonpsychologists or mental health professionals and can
lead to confusion, misinterpretation, or misuse instead of looking impressive,
as some might intend. Incorporating a few examples of relevant client comments and
description of behaviors can aid readers in concretely recognizing what the evaluator is referring to, and can almost bring the report alive—again making the report more user friendly. When standardized tests or inventories are used,
providing references and comparative scores (normative scores, population to whom
data was compared) helps professionals form their own impressions about the
findings. Similarly, reports on obscure problems might benefit from being supplemented with literature references to substantiate claims made and provide
the referral source with additional information to facilitate understanding. Discussing strengths rather than just weaknesses or limits is also important to ensure
that the report is balanced, does not present or create biases, and that the referral source can identify clients’ resources that may aid in treatment delivery.
Most importantly, the report must address and hopefully answer the referral question (the goal of the assessment)!
Many referral sources are most interested in the answer to their question:
“What is the problem and what can be done about it?” It is common for nonmental health professionals and laypersons to immediately skip to the clinical
impressions, diagnosis, summary, and recommendations sections. So be sure
230 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
that if someone only reads these sections, the information presented there is
completely consistent with the rest of the report. Since recommendations are
typically most sought after, more extensive advice is proposed here.
Clinicians should always include a comprehensive list of recommendations for
the client across all relevant biopsychosocial aspects assessed (if faulty cognitions are noted, give recommendations to change them; if behaviors are problematic, interventions to target behavior change should be provided), referral
source (if relevant), and family or school system or environment (if appropriate). Recommendations that focus on what clients can learn to change or control are
most helpful, rather than recommendations that suggest changes in environment or significant others who are not contracted for treatment (spouse should
be less accepting of patient’s drinking and erratic behaviors; coworkers should
be advised to ignore hostile outbursts). In some cases, environmental changes
might be appropriate, especially for helping to change child and adolescent behaviors, or to assist in modifying behaviors of elder adults under residential
nursing care or home care by others. In these cases, evaluators might recommend interventions that require cooperation of patients’ social systems, if individual change is less likely to be successful through individual intervention.
Overall, recommendations, conclusions, and data must be consistent. No recommendations should be made that do not have some justification in the data provided. In other words, the recommendation to “increase social interactions
with peers” should not be made, unless the clinician has inquired about the
client’s social interactions, has data or self-report information to suggest that
current social interactions are insufficient, and that the current social limits are
impacting on the reason for the referral. Prior to any and every release of a report, clinicians ought to review the whole report and then reread the recommendations to verify that the claims made are justified.
Comprehensive recommendations are critical to ensuring the utility of the
report provided to the referral source. If clinicians simply elaborate on history,
background, and the details of the already evident problem, what to do about
the problem remains unknown. This is also why clinicians should not recommend
further testing if their role was to evaluate the client as needed. If further testing
is needed, evaluators should either do it or refer the client within the assessment process. In many cases by using the clinical decision-making model, evaluators can recognize early in the assessment process that they are not the best
person to accept the referral. In some cases, evaluators may later learn more
about a client and decide they cannot conduct necessary portions of the evaluation. These evaluators should make necessary provisions for the clients to gain
the additional testing or assessment, and then incorporate the additional information into their report.
Verbal Feedback
Patients require a thorough explanation of how diagnostic and clinical impressions were formed, what recommendations were made, and why. The utmost
care is needed to communicate sensitive results and troublesome findings. Many
of the same suggestions made for written reports are offered for the verbal feedback session: clarity, concrete and simple language, minimal to no jargon, logical
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 231
presentation, and provision of a balance between clients’ strengths and weaknesses or deficits.
Clients are likely to have questions following the feedback session, and
clinicians should be available for these questions to ensure proper debriefing
and understanding of assessments. However, clinicians need to reinforce the
professional-patient roles; the professional should maintain the role of evaluator, not therapist, and not primary care provider. Clients at times may need direction following assessments. Similarly, clinicians must also be aware that
clients have various motives for assessment and depending on the outcomes,
may or may not agree with the findings. Clients who do not agree with assessment findings may attempt to persuade evaluators to change reports in some
ways, or may try to persuade evaluators that their impressions were incorrect
for one reason or another. If either of these scenarios arise, evaluators are reminded to rely on effective clinical skills to manage such sessions, and to use
the problem-solving model to identify problems, obstacles, goals, and solutions
to these problems. It is wise risk management to make note in the client’s clinical record of any points of disagreement that were discussed during the verbal
feedback session.
Verbal communication to professionals often precedes their receipt of the
formal written report. It is imperative that clinicians are prepared to provide diagnoses, brief clinical impressions, and recommendations when phone calls to
referral sources are placed. In other words, be prepared to answer questions
and provide substantiated claims, not first impressions or hypotheses regarding
patients’ problems. This advice is predicated on the fact that most professionals
are very busy, and while the formal written report will be useful to have in patients’ charts for future reference, they are more interested in getting their
questions answered immediately than reviewing 5 to 10 pages of psychological
prose. Also, time constraints might require their immediate action, rather than
afford them the luxury of waiting for reports to be completed and sent. As
such, important decisions are often made based on clinicians’ follow-up phone
calls, prior to receiving the entire clinical report.
Several years ago a graduate student returned a phone call to a physician
about the status of her evaluation with a patient being considered for a bone
marrow transplant. The patient had been ornery and noncompliant with nursing staff, and therefore, the physician was not optimistic that she would follow
detailed instructions pre-, post- and during the procedure. The psychology extern was consulted and asked to provide an opinion on this person’s candidacy
for the transplant, given what is known to be involved. The student called the
physician after an unsuccessful attempt to meet with the patient. She told him,
“I went to her room twice to try to meet with her and she turned me away both
times after very brief encounters. So far, I haven’t been able to evaluate her as
I normally have evaluated your other patients.” Before the student could finish
her commentary, the physician responded, “Thank you. That’s all I needed to
know!” The student nearly panicked because the physician was making lifeaffecting decisions based on her verbal feedback, without her intending for it to
be taken as such. Fortunately, she was being supervised in a teaching hospital
and the supervisor (SHF) could contact the physician to further explain and
evaluate the situation.
232 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Assessment
Summary
Assessment and evaluation is a complex process that goes beyond knowing what
tests to give, how to administer and score them, and giving a diagnosis. This
chapter focused on the logistics of how to “put it all together.” The problemsolving model of clinical decision making (A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M.
Nezu et al., 1997) was offered as a logistical strategy to structure and organize
clinical thinking, and to guide clinicians in integrating complex information.
The case of Mrs. Giunardini, a 32-year-old female faced with a time-sensitive
life-altering decision, was presented to illustrate the procedural logistics of actually conducting a clinical assessment and creating a clinical intake report.
Procedural logistics of an assessment include socializing patients to the
clinical process and procedures, obtaining informed consent and releases of and
for information, discussing limits and parameters of confidentiality, and creating a decision plan for the approach to the assessment. Once these issues have
been covered, most assessments begin with some form of an interview. The
goal of the assessment, determined by the reason for the referral, will dictate
the type and format of interview that is most appropriate: diagnostic, mental
status or general clinical interview; structured, semistructured, or unstructured
interview.
Interviewing is a complex skill that requires much rehearsal and roleplaying, clinical practice, supervision, and critical thinking. Interviews are
most often the basis for all subsequent assessments, or serve alone as the comprehensive method of assessment. Clinicians, therefore, must learn to make
clinical decisions within the interview that allow them to keep the session focused, inquire about all aspects of the biopsychosocial systems model, maintain
good rapport and trust, and develop collaboration with the client. Throughout
the interview, clinicians are encouraged to be observant of verbal and nonverbal behavior, and clients’ reactions to questions, tests, or other interactions
within each session.
Discussion of Mrs. Giunardini’s case illustrated what we consider to be the
essence of clinicians’ interview tools—questions, prompts, and transitions. Attention to asking difficult questions was given, due to our witnessing the difficulty that many practitioners-in-training experience surrounding sensitive
topics. Interviewers were reminded to consciously review the data gained in an
interview session prior to dismissing the client to identify and fill gaps in the
data. Lastly, the topic of feedback was addressed, with suggestions for preparing
user-friendly written reports and for providing verbal feedback.
The Logistics of the Assessment and a Closer Look at Interviewing 233

BASIC TECHNIQUES FOR
CLINICIANS— INTERVENTION
Chapter 9 Developing a Case Conceptualization
Chapter 10 Developing a Treatment Plan: Therapeutic
Alliance and Collaborative Goals
Chapter 11 Therapeutic Methods: Building
Psychotherapy Skills
Chapter 12 Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating
Change
Chapter 13 Impediments to Change
Chapter 14 Effective Termination

The basis of any psychotherapeutic intervention is the case conceptualization. In a useful conceptualization, the clinician takes the accumulated
data and forms a model for understanding and explaining the patient’s difficulties, as well as selecting and timing strategies that will be relevant and effective.
A useful conceptualization is developed and revised in a step-by-step fashion as
information is gathered and hypotheses are tested. The clinician shares this
conceptualization with the patient, typically using common language or illustrations rather than professional technical terms. In this way, the clinician engages the patient in self-examination and planning for change.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Understand what is meant by “case conceptualization.”
• Discuss how the case conceptualization relates to the biopsychosocial
model.
• Describe the functional purpose of a case conceptualization.
• Identify five conceptual approaches or styles among therapists.
• Understand case conceptualization as an active process.
It is Friday evening at the Albert Ellis Institute in New York. Dr. Ellis is sitting on the platform with a volunteer “patient” from the audience. The volunteer is talking about how she has difficulty getting her schoolwork finished.
Ellis listens briefly and then responds:
238 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
“You are being a perfectionist. You are telling yourself that you MUST do perfectly
well or there is something terribly wrong with you.”
“But” the volunteer patient starts to explain, “I need to do the very best that
I can. This is what my professors expect, this is what my parents have always expected, and I believe that I should not be satisfied with being mediocre.”
“Your problem is that you say that you MUST be perfect rather than accepting that you are a fallible human being and that if there are times that your work
is less than perfect, you will survive. If you said that you would prefer to do well,
but you didn’t always have to be perfect, what difference would that make in
your life?”
“I guess I wouldn’t always be beating myself up.”
“Yes. You believe that if you did something less than perfectly, it would be
awful and that it would prove that there was something terribly wrong with you.”
“But that is what I was always told.”
“Just because someone told you some nutty thing about always having to be
perfect, you don’t have to believe it.”
The preceding interchange could be viewed in many different ways. On one
hand, a fan or believer in Ellis’s approach to therapy might view this as an elegant
and parsimonious intervention. A critic, on the other hand, might decry the lack
of information gathering, the lack of rapport building, the lack of a therapeutic
contract, and the very directive and forceful nature of the intervention. The critics
would find fault and perhaps even resent Ellis’s apparent “shooting from the hip”
without establishing a solid database. If you can imagine being the volunteer patient described in this vignette, or perhaps imagine your best friend as the volunteer patient, how do you think you would react? Would you appreciate the direct
and incisive feedback, or would you want to run screaming from the room to
warn others to stay away? If you think the approach might be useful for some
people but not others, who do you think would be most likely to benefit?
We can also view the interchange as a superb example of case conceptualization. It would be incorrect to view what Ellis did as “shooting from the hip.”
Ellis’s conceptualization is based on two psychological elements (Ellis, 1962).
The first element is his basic A→ B→ C model of the relationship between cognition, affect, and behavior. The patient’s response to the situation (A) of work
requirements is influenced by her beliefs (B) about the need for perfection, and
results in her work-related emotional and behavioral paralysis (C). So the sequence is A = I have an assignment for school. B = I must do it perfectly well or
something awful would happen to me, and C = I ruminate and procrastinate
about it or spend inordinate amounts of time on the assignment, no matter how
minimal the assignment.
A second psychological element of Ellis’s conceptualization is the assumption that all problems can be broken down into three types of beliefs: (1) demands on self (I must be perfect), (2) demands from the others (They should
not make demands on me), and (3) the view that the world should be fair (The
world should be fair and equitable and not burden me as it does). With these
two elements as a base, we can see that Ellis’s psychological interventions come
quickly and clearly as a result of his conceptualization of the patient’s problem.
This is, of course, coupled with his 50 years of clinical experience.
Developing a Case Conceptualization 239
Contemporary psychotherapy has taken a decidedly scientific turn as we
enter the twenty-first century. The definition of the therapist as simply a good
listener whose job is to help the patient feel better has changed to the definition
of the therapist as an active and directive participant-observer whose job is to
help the patient to use empirically supported techniques to change and to get
better. Indeed, long before the advent of managed care, many therapists approached therapy by developing an overall conceptualization that integrated
multiple systems or levels of functioning of each individual.
What Is Case Conceptualization?
Case conceptualization refers to a systematic and comprehensive process of organizing and explaining the information pertinent to each patient. Conceptualization generally involves building a model that can be viewed and examined
in three dimensions and in multiple layers of detail. Whenever architects design a building or sculptors plan a large work, they build a model in clay, wood,
plaster or, more recently, as a three-dimensional computer model.
The model helps the artist visualize the various elements of the sculpture.
The architect can examine the size, shape, proportion, fit, and position of the
structure relative to other structures in the environment. Blueprints of the
plumbing, electrical, ventilation, and structural systems, as well as a layout for
finishing details such as paint colors and landscaping may be part of the model,
showing how all the systems will work together in one structure. Changes can be
made when the model comes out of the ether, off the page or drafting board, and
into the real world. The clinical case conceptualization does the same thing for
the therapist. The development of a treatment conceptualization is a matter of
psychological model-building. Without this model, the therapist is forced to fly
blind and to randomly attempt interventions without an order, focus, or goal.
Historically, psychological model-building has been based primarily on
theory. The therapist’s approach to case conceptualization reflected his or her
affiliation with a particular theory or school of therapy. The quality of the psychological model depended on the therapist’s skill and flair for applying the
concepts of a specific system. Contemporary conceptualization, however, has
gradually shifted away from a relatively narrow theoretical orientation toward
a broader, more comprehensive biopsychosocial model of human behavior. The
biopsychosocial model emphasizes scientifically grounded concepts and multiple layers or interacting systems to explain human behavior and psychopathology. Psychological factors do not exist in isolation from biological and social
elements of the patient’s life, but rather interact in ways that affect the whole
system. In the psychological realm, affect, cognition, and behavior are all dynamic and interacting subsystems that can be detailed as parts of the overall
conceptual model. All assumptions of the model either have a clear scientific
basis, or are posited as hypotheses to be tested for accuracy and validity.
This scientific approach to conceptualization is, of necessity, based on the assessment data from family and developmental histories, test data, interview
material, reports of previous therapists or other professionals, and information
240 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
gleaned from the patient’s experiences with educational, legal, military and other
cultural systems. It takes into account the patient’s life context, stated problems,
strengths, and deficits. It is also revised as needed throughout the treatment.
The conceptualization must meet several criteria. It must be specific,
concrete, coherent, consistent, and reasonable. Conceptualizations that are
vague, global, and abstract are far less useful. The conceptualization must be
simple and parsimonious. The more complex, the less valuable it is. The conceptualization must have an internal consistency. When there are large gaps in
the conceptualization, the clinician must account for these gaps. To fill in the
gaps with theoretical constructs such as “unconscious” is highly questionable.
To concretize the conceptualization, it can be illustrated or diagrammed. This
picture or image can then be shared with the patient.
Even though case conceptualization is essential to effective therapy, it is
rarely taught in graduate programs. Instead, students learn about different systems and schools of therapy without necessarily learning conceptualization
skills. Then, as novice therapists, they learn a list of techniques for “doing”
therapy in a cookbook fashion, as if all problems could be addressed with the
same techniques applied in a formulaic fashion. To get some sort of result, the
therapist may resort to the “shovel” approach in applying techniques. The basic
notion of the shovel approach to therapy is that if enough techniques are
thrown at a patient, something may stick or work. A case conceptualization, instead, provides direction and logic to the interventions selected for the particular problems of a particular patient.
Functional Purpose of a Case Conceptualization
The functional purpose of a case conceptualization is to promote effective and
efficient use of therapeutic resources. If the therapist has a treatment conceptualization, the therapy will be proactive and not simply reactive. In fact, a conceptualization-based approach makes treatment easier. It provides the therapist
and the patient with a road map for their meetings and interactions. The plans
for therapy, the types of changes that patients can reasonably expect, and the
path to reach the goals all derive from the therapist’s formulation or the case
conceptualization. Rather than simply restating the patient’s words, or reflecting the patient’s mood, the active therapist will share hypotheses, use guided
discovery, encourage the patient, serve as a resource person, be a case manager,
and, in certain limited cases, be an advocate for the patient. Only with a clear
case conceptualization can the therapist confidently choose when and how to
apply these various intervention strategies.
We cannot assume that a single size (intervention) fits all and that just because a model works with one disorder (e.g., depression) that it will work
equally well without modification on another (e.g., anxiety). The treatment
chosen in one case may be contraindicated in another. Even if the disorder is
the same, the treatment plan for one person may not look at all like the plan for
another. Each treatment conceptualization is unique, reflecting the particular
details and specific issues of the individual patient and his or her circumstances.
Developing a Case Conceptualization 241
If the conceptualization is accurate, it will do three things. First, it will account for the patient’s past behavior. Second, it will make sense of the patient’s
present behavior. And, finally, it will allow prediction of the patient’s future behavior. Case conceptualization is essential to developing an understanding of patients, their life, their home and work situations, their interpersonal style, their
problems and the strategies that may be most appropriate for facilitating change.
The demands of contemporary psychotherapy often call for a time-limited
approach to therapy. This is not because of the forced limits of managed care
but because empirical data suggest that time-limited therapy is effective. Efficacy research protocols generally involve around 12 to 20 sessions, over a period of no more than 20 weeks. In clinical practice, however, the course of
treatment is not limited to 20 weeks. For certain patients, the length of therapy
may be 6 sessions; for other patients, 50 sessions. The length of the therapy, the
frequency of the sessions, and the session length are all negotiable and based on
the conceptualization of the patient’s functioning. The problems being worked
on, the skills of the patient and of the therapist, the time available for therapy,
and the financial resources must be factored into the conceptualization, and all
have the potential to dictate the parameters of treatment.
Conceptual Approaches
The novice therapist can learn a great deal by observing an experienced therapist at work. The experienced therapist often makes therapy look deceptively
easy. Supervisees frequently ask, “How do you know what interventions have
the greatest utility with a specific patient? How do you recognize the best time
to use a particular strategy or specific intervention? How far do you press a
particular strategy or intervention until you either revise it or abandon it?” The
simplest response would be the old cliché, “Therapy is an art form, not a science.” Students just have to study the art and, if talented, one day will magically “understand” how to emulate the master therapist. Alternatively, if they
believe that the therapeutic process needs to be scientific, they will examine the
process, identify the elements that combine for successful therapy, and evaluate
their efforts in a systematic way.
The conceptual approach can be related to the therapist’s style or philosophy of therapy. We can identify five types of therapist based on their conceptual
style, which transcends any particular theoretical background, training, or
practice. They are the theoretician, the technician, the magician, the politician,
and the clinician.
The theoretician is well grounded in the theory and research of therapy,
but does not believe that one has to gain skills in therapy to do therapy. They
operate on the assumption that if the theory is correct then the implementation
is a mere technical maneuver that anyone of normal intelligence can implement. These individuals spend their time teaching about therapy, discoursing
about therapy, theorizing about therapy, and researching therapy, but not much
time doing therapy. Instead, they focus on developing and elaborating a particular theory.
242 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
The technician is the therapist who acquires specific skills, regardless of
the model. They can do therapy “by the book.” That is, they do a little bit of this
and a little bit of that, emulating the teachers whom they regard as masters of a
particular skill. They go to conferences and attend numerous skills workshops
so that they can enhance their bag of technical tricks. They do Gestalt work, behavioral work, and analytic work, and so on. These individuals often term what
they do as “eclectic.” What they lack, however, is a unifying conceptualization
of development, behavior, and approach to therapy. They try to do what they
believe works, without a healthy skepticism about the potential limits of their
methods. They view philosophical or theoretical discussions as distracting and
boring and avoid them.
The magician doesn’t need skills. They are charismatic, so that an hour a
week in their aura is, by itself therapeutic. Like the theoretician, they would
not think of lowering themselves by learning mundane technique. They don’t
try to emulate the experts because they believe themselves to be experts with
the therapeutic relationship. When pressed, they may label their work as “supportive.” They often pride themselves on having avoided extensive therapeutic
training, and focus on their ability to discuss esoteric therapeutic issues in obscure journals. In the view of the magician, the mental “laying on of hands” is
enough to effect a therapeutic change. They believe that therapy will just happen by force of their emotionally provocative presence.
The politician is technique and brand-oriented, and practices what is most
popular at the moment. Whether Primal Scream, marathon encounter groups,
or cognitive-guided disco-behavior therapy is used, the politician is on the cutting edge of political correctness and popularity. They are presently waiting to
see what is next on the horizon and will be first in line with the latest movement. They don’t wait for scientific results to accumulate; they embrace the latest and just move on when public interest wanes.
The fifth type of therapist, the clinician, combines some elements of all
five types in his or her philosophy of therapy and approach to conceptualization. The clinician has a theoretical understanding of development and behavior, therapeutic skills, an understanding of the therapeutic techniques that
work within that framework, and can develop and maintain a strong working
relationship with the patient. This type of therapist is far more likely to attend
both theoretical meetings and skills sessions at a conference. These therapists
are willing to combine modalities such as behavioral-marital therapy, and try to
develop models that are broader in depth and scope. The clinician learns about
what is popular and cutting edge, but evaluates the evidence before adopting
new techniques or methods.
The Conceptualization Process
The conceptualization is an ongoing process of formulating and testing hypotheses. The process begins with the first contact with the patient either directly, through significant others, or through a referral from a colleague. The
process will, of necessity, go through several incarnations. There will be the ini-
Developing a Case Conceptualization 243
tial conceptualization, followed by all the requisite revisions and emendations
made as additional data is collected. This data may come through patient report, or through the in vivo experience of the therapeutic collaboration. If the
conceptualization is cast in granite, the therapy will be limited and rigid. The
static conceptualization will limit the therapist’s ability to account for actions,
thoughts, and behavior that emerge in the therapy. With a rigid conceptualization as the primary tool for guiding therapy, the therapist is like the carpenter
whose only tool is a hammer, and every new development becomes a nail to be
hit with that hammer.
One difficulty in the conceptualization process for many clinicians is that
they accept patient complaints as problem statements. If a patient comes in with
the complaint of depression, the therapist has to help the patient identify the
problems that come together to cause the state that we have learned to label as
depression. The patient’s low self-esteem, pessimism, hopelessness, decisionmaking difficulty, decreased libido, or sleep difficulties are the problems. By delineating the problems and not focusing on the complaints, the therapist can
examine and evaluate causal or maintenance factors in the patient’s life for each
problem. Similarly, the patient who reports having panic attacks needs to have
the broad term of panic broken up into the component problems.
Effective conceptualization starts with the premise that behavior has reason,
meaning, and purpose. Behavior is not random, but is guided by what has been
learned, or what has been acquired through conditioning. Behavior is affected by
biological, social, and psychological systems and serves a function within these
systems. The comprehensive conceptualization will consider psychological factors
in the context of other biological and social information. In the next step of the
conceptualization process, the therapist develops hypotheses about the reasons
for a particular patient’s behavior in a particular context and what maintains the
patient’s thoughts, actions, and emotions. If on target, the conceptualization can
also suggest the course of therapy, the strategies for intervention, and the most
promising interventions. For maximum impact and effectiveness, the therapist
will build a treatment plan and then use a range of skills and techniques to implement the treatment. Specific techniques or combinations of techniques are selected to suit the purpose and goals of therapy, the therapist’s conceptualization of
the problem(s), the patient’s readiness and motivation for change, the resources
available in the patient’s environment, and the therapist’s skill and style.
Understanding Schemas
At the core of the psychological component of conceptualization is a grasp of
the patient’s schema, or cognitive templates for perceiving, organizing, and responding to experience. Some schemas are broad and include a variety of more
specific schemas (e.g., the schema for pets is very broad and might include a
large variety of creatures, from parakeets to tarantulas). Some schemas are organized around polar opposites, particularly schema for emotionally relevant
concepts. The schema for safety is highly related to the schema for danger. If
you happen to be vision-impaired and rely on your trained seeing-eye dog for
your mobility, then your schema for pet is highly active and your sense of
safety is associated with being near your dog. If your dog goes missing, this
244 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
would activate your schema for danger. But, if you grew up in a family that disliked pets and feared dogs, your schema for dogs might include beliefs such as
“stay away from that animal or he will bite you!” Any dog, even a fluffy miniature poodle peeking out from a woman’s purse might trigger your schema for
danger. In the latter example, the schema for pets does not include an association to a schema for safety.
Operative or Salient Schemas
It is essential to understand the patient’s operative schemas. Particular schemas
may engender a great deal of affect and be emotionally bound by both the individual’s past experience and by the sheer weight of the time in which that belief has
been held. In addition, the perceived importance and credibility of the source
from whom the schemas were acquired plays a part in their strength and durability. There is a cognitive element to the schemas that pervades the individual’s
thoughts and images. With the proper training, individuals can be helped to describe schemas in great detail or to deduce them from behavior or automatic
thoughts. Finally, there is a behavioral component that involves the way the belief
system governs the individual’s responses to a particular stimulus or set of stimuli. For some patients, the sequence may be cognitive-affective-behavioral; for another patient, the therapeutic sequence would be behavioral-cognitive-affective.
Inasmuch as the schemas become, in effect, how people define themselves, both individually, and as part of a group, they are important to understand and factor into the treatment conceptualization. They may be said to be
unconscious, using a definition of the unconscious as “ideas we are unaware
of,” or “ideas that we are not aware of simply because they are not in the focus
of attention but in the fringe of consciousness” (Campbell, 2003).
Inactive schemas are called into play to control behavior in times of stress.
Stressors will evoke the inactive schemas, which become active and govern behavior. When the stressor is removed, the schemas will return to their previously
dormant state. Conceptually, understanding the activity-inactivity continuum
explains two related clinical phenomena. The first involves the rapid, though
transient, positive changes often evidenced in therapy, the so-called transference
cure or flight into health. The result of this phenomenon is that a patient with
clinical symptoms seems to have a partial or full recovery in a surprisingly brief
period and will then seek to terminate therapy as no longer needed. What we
may be seeing is the patient, under stress, responding to the activation of several
dormant schemas. They may direct the patient’s behavior in dysfunctional and
self-destructive ways. On entering therapy and experiencing the acceptance and
support of the therapist, stress is lowered, and the problematic schemas are deactivated. If, however, the patient leaves therapy without gaining the skills for coping with stress, the problem may reemerge when, and if, the stressor returns.
Individuals who develop effective coping strategies may be able to deal with
stress throughout their lives and rarely have dormant schemas activated.
Dormant Schemas
The second clinical phenomenon is the arousal of dormant schemas that cause
the patient to appear, on intake or admission to the hospital, to be extremely
disturbed. After brief psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, or combination, the pa-
Developing a Case Conceptualization 245
tient appears far better integrated, far more attentive, and far “healthier.” In
fact, after the stress is removed, the therapist may question the existence of the
psychopathology.
The particular extent of effect that a schema has on an individual’s life
depends on several factors. The first issue is to evaluate how strongly the
schema is held. Schemas that are seen as part of the patient’s view of self are
likely to be more strongly held. These schemas are difficult to change as they
are how individuals define themselves and see themselves in the context of
their world. These compelling schemas are often easily seen by the therapist but
may be the hardest to address and change. After all, individuals who hold onto
their beliefs even after being threatened with death are labeled hero or martyr.
A related issue is how essential the individual sees particular schema to be
to their safety, well-being, or existence. Does the patient engage in any disputation of one’s thoughts, actions, or feelings when a particular schema is activated? This is related to the individual’s previous learning vis-à-vis the
importance and essential nature of a particular schema. Probably the most important issue is related to how early a particular schema was internalized. The
earlier the schema was acquired, the more powerful it will be, and the greater
effect it will have on the individual’s behavior. Layden, Newman, Freeman, and
Byers-Morse (1993) speak of the impact of an early internalized schema as
being in a cloud. This schema will influence behavior, but the patient may not
be aware of where the direction and power come from.
Case Illustration of Conceptualization Process
The following examples illustrate the building of a case conceptualization as
data about biological, psychological, and social functioning are gathered. In the
cases that follow, note the interactions between physical functioning, psychological perspectives, and role functioning and interpersonal relationships.
Example 1
Case Conceptualization
Following a Suicide Attempt
Alex, a 44-year-old married male was
referred for therapy by his family physician following a severe suicide attempt.
He had been hospitalized for a week. The
early part of the in-patient time, Alex
was in a coma. It appeared that a number of psychosocial issues combined to
push him over the edge. He was hopeless
about his perceived business failures, his
marriage, his health, and his finances, in
that order. He came for his initial therapy appointment directly from the inpatient medical unit. He had refused any
psychiatric consultation while in the
hospital, and agreed to the therapy appointment as a condition and promise to
the family physician. He came to the appointment accompanied by his mother.
First Data Point
His appointment time was 2:00 P.M. He
arrived at 1:45 P.M. with his mother.
Given these data, the clinician can begin
(continued)
246 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Example 1 (Continued)
to develop conceptual hypotheses. We
cannot be sure of the accuracy of the
initial conceptualization. This will be
confirmed as the data collection and the
consultation unfold.
Working Hypotheses
• Alex follows rules (he shows up on
time).
• He is a people pleaser (he does what
the doctor asks).
• He is dependent (he does what he is
told).
• He is unable to do things independently (he comes with his mother).
• He is overwhelmed by life (he made
the suicide attempt).
• He is emotionally estranged from his
wife (he is with his mother).
Can you think of any other hypotheses to propose?
Second Data Point
Alex was asked by the receptionist to
complete basic demographic information forms. After these were completed,
the therapist was informed and came
into the waiting room to greet Alex.
The therapist approached Alex, shook
hands. Alex stands up in response to
the greeting.
Working Hypotheses
• Alex understands social conventions (he responds to the therapist’s
greeting in a socially appropriate
manner).
• Alex fears being scolded by his
mother if he does not comply.
• Alex does not want to be embarrassed in front of the receptionist.
Can you think of any other potential
hypotheses?
Third Data Point
Alex is invited into the therapist’s office. At this point, his mother stands
up and starts to follow Alex into the
therapist’s office. The therapist asks,
“Can I help you?” She responds, “I’m
his mother.”
Working Hypotheses
• She views him as unable to care for
himself (she comes with him because
she thinks he needs her).
• She is a caring concerned mother
(she comes with him because she
does not want him to be alone with
a stranger).
• She assumes that she has license
to do what she wishes without
asking (she comes with him, and
starts into the office without an invitation).
• She blames herself for his failures
and suicide attempt (she comes with
him because she must now learn
how to fix her mistakes).
Can you think of any other working
hypotheses?
Fourth Data Point
The therapist acknowledges her and
states that he would like to meet with
her after meeting with her son. She
turns to Alex and says, “Alex is there a
problem in my coming in?” He says,
“No mom. It’s alright.”
Working Hypotheses
• They are enmeshed (he accepts her
presence because he does not see
her as separate from him).
• He is afraid of her (he accepts her
presence because he does not want
to provoke her anger).
Developing a Case Conceptualization 247
Example 1 (Continued)
• He is afraid of the therapist (he accepts her presence to feel safe).
• He needs her support to survive (he
accepts her presence because he depends on her).
• He sees the session as potentially
dangerous (he accepts her presence
to avoid something bad happening to
him).
• He is passive (he accepts her presence because he has no energy to
resist).
• They both want to make sure
that no family “secrets” are divulged. (He accepts her presence
because they both must abide by this
family rule.)
Do you have any other working hypotheses?
Fifth Data Point
Upon entering the office, the therapist
says to both, “Please, be seated.” Mother
sits in the chair next to the therapist and
Alex sits in a chair at a distance from the
other seats.
Working Hypotheses
• He wants her to do most of the work
(he lets her sit first).
• She will protect him (she sits closer,
allowing Alex to be at a distance).
• She sees herself as more central (she
sits closer, allowing Alex to be at a
distance).
• He is willing to be in the session but
does not want to be involved (Alex
sits at a distance).
• She will be the main worker in the
session (she sits closer, allowing Alex
to be at a distance).
• Few secrets will be divulged (she is
in the room).
• More will be accomplished by her
being there (she wants to make sure
that Alex gets help).
• Alex is gender-socialized to give the
best seat to his mother (he allows
her to sit first).
• She does not trust the competence of
the therapist (she sits closer to ensure that he does his job).
Are there any other reasonable hypotheses?
The reader might wonder why the
therapist allowed mother into this
first session. The answer is an important part of the conceptualization. By
allowing Alex and his mother to make
this determination, the therapist gained
important information regarding the
degree of power that mother had in
Alex’s current situation. To exclude her
would have spelled the end of therapy
at the outset. For therapy to continue
beyond Session 1, mother would need
to be “cultivated” as a therapy assistant.
To begin altering their system of interpersonal interaction this soon would
likely result in her sabotage of therapy,
either directly or indirectly, or Alex’s
failure to engage in therapy at all.
Sixth Data Point
When questions were addressed to
Alex, his mother provided the answers.
Working Hypotheses
• He is too depressed to speak.
• He is too afraid to speak.
• He has been told by his mother that
she will answer all questions so he
can conserve his energy.
• He is psychotic.
• He is passive aggressive.
• He thinks the meeting is a joke.
(continued)
248 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Example 1 (Continued)
Seventh Data Point
When the therapist addresses questions
directly to Alex, his mother gets very
angry stating, “Stop putting so much
pressure on him. Don’t you know how
fragile he is?”
Working Hypotheses
• He is too weak to respond.
• She is terrified that he will die.
• She was traumatized by his suicide
attempt.
• He is reluctant to assert himself with
his mother present.
Eighth Data Point
Toward the end of the session, the therapist asked Alex to have a seat in the
waiting room and he spoke with the
mother. Although wary, she responded
well when the therapist asked if she
would be willing to help the therapist
in working with her son. She agreed
and asked what she could do. When
told by the therapist that it was not
clear that Alex would return for a second session, his mother assured the
therapist (her new working partner),
“He’ll be here.”
The treatment for Alex would have
to focus on any, or all, of the following
with the agreement of the patient: reducing hopelessness, developing motivation for treatment, marital therapy,
assertive training, building self-esteem
and personal efficacy, and separating
from his mother. He is still physically
weak from the suicide attempt and
coma, and could benefit from time off
from work on a medical leave to fully
recuperate. Although he has had some
difficulty with his work and is sensitive
to perceived failures, he is still in good
standing with his employer. Both his
“failure” and his “alone” schemas have
been highly activated, even though his
perceptions in these realms are not entirely accurate. He has the family support of his mother who will be attentive
in looking after his best interests, and
his children are highly concerned about
his recovery. This initial model is open
to revision as additional data is collected and processed.
Example 2
Case Conceptualization
with a Busy Outpatient
In the next example, the same biopsychosocial strategy is used to build the
case conceptualization.
First Data Point
Case conceptualization begins with
an initial telephone call to the therapist’s office at 3:00 P.M. on a Thursday
from a prospective patient requesting
an appointment.
Patient: Hello, Dr. Black?
Therapist: Yes.
Patient: You don’t know me, but I was
referred by Dr. Smith here in Smalltown. He is a former classmate of
my primary care physician, Dr.
White. Dr. Smith said that I need to
see you and I would like to set up an
appointment as soon as possible.
What would be the earliest you
could see me?
Therapist: I have two openings. How
about Monday at 1:00 P.M., or
Wednesday at 11:00 A.M.?
Developing a Case Conceptualization 249
Example 2 (Continued)
Patient: Is that the earliest appointments
that you have? How about Saturday?
I could come in on Saturday.
Therapist: I’m sorry, but I’m not in the
office on Saturday.
Patient: Well let me see. Monday at 1:00
P.M. or Wednesday at 11:00 A.M. Could
you make it Monday at 11:00 A.M.?
Therapist: I’m sorry, but that time is
filled.
Patient: The 1:00 P.M. is late. I’ll take
the Wednesday at 11:00 A.M. Wait,
wait, could you make it Wednesday
at 11:30 A.M.?
Therapist: No, 11:00 A.M. is the available time. I could make it Friday at
11:30 A.M.
Patient: That’s too far away. I’ll take the
Wednesday. . . . No, make it the
Monday. Yes, the Monday. I have to
get my hair cut. Besides, Friday I
play tennis. Wait, do you think that
the later, I mean earlier, time will
open up? Oh never mind.
Second Data Point
One hour later, the patient calls back.
Patient: Dr. Black, is the Wednesday still
open?
Working Hypotheses
• The patient has difficulty making
decisions.
• The patient expects the therapist to
change to accommodate her wishes
and needs.
• Her needs and wishes supersede the
needs of all others.
• Therapy may be difficult in terms of
setting and keeping appointments.
• The patient views the therapist as an
employee.
Based on this sample of the patient’s
psychosocial functioning, it is likely
that therapy would need to include
limit setting for the protection of the
therapist and to offer structure to
the therapy.
The patient’s social skills, fear of
abandonment, dependence, obsessivecompulsive characteristics, and demanding behavior may all be part of
the picture that can be used to develop the conceptualization and then
become part of the problem list that
can be offered as grist for the therapeutic mill.
Sharing the Conceptualization with the Patient
Because the conceptualization guides the process of therapy, the working hypotheses can be shared with the patient using a Socratic dialogue. Rather than
interpreting the patient’s thoughts or actions, the therapist can raise questions
about the thoughts, actions, and feelings. In fact, the therapist who verbally communicates evolving hypotheses as interpretations runs the risk of appearing to
be mind reading the patient’s thoughts and intentions. Further, offering an interpretation such as “you seem angry” may evoke agreement from patients when
they really are more annoyed than angry. It may seem simpler to accept the therapist’s statement than try to disagree and seem ungrateful or contrary. The questioning format allows the patient to maintain integrity and allows the therapist to
gather the most accurate data. The overall case conceptualization is thus shaped
by developing and testing various hypotheses through therapeutic dialogue.
250 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Sharing working hypotheses can sometimes be problematic for the therapist. If a depressed patient asks, “Doctor, what’s wrong with me?” we may
have no difficulty in offering an explanation of the diagnosis. After all, one
can read about depression in any number of popular books and magazines as a
widespread problem that could happen to anyone. We may have no trouble
discussing or describing diagnoses of anxiety, panic, or phobia. The difficulty
occurs when the diagnosis is more serious (e.g., an Axis II problem). What can
the clinician say when the working diagnosis and conceptualization is Borderline Personality Disorder? Any reference to a disorder of personality is a potentially volatile statement and easily misconstrued. These categories are less
well known to the general public and are filled with many pitfalls. Is the problem easily solved? Can it be treated with medication? Will it last forever? Can
therapy cure this disorder? What motivation is necessary to cure or help this
problem? How long will it take? Where does it come from and whose fault is
it? Why is this necessarily true about me? These are all reasonable questions.
We can be evasive and take the position that these questions can only be
answered over the long term of the therapy. If we are conceptualizing the patient’s problems as Axis II, we know that the problem is generally more difficult to work with, motivation is low, medication is not generally useful, and so
on (A. T. Beck et al., 2004). Because of problems in defining the Axis II categories, the sharing of a diagnostic label is probably less helpful to the patient
than a descriptive explanation of specific problems. However, it is essential to
share the conceptualization so that the patient can know what the therapist is
seeing and direction of the therapy.
Using reframing, the therapist can share the conceptualization that provides a basis for understanding and organizing the symptoms and struggles of
the patient, while still showing respect and regard for the patient’s autonomy.
In working with the schizoid patient, the therapist can highlight the patient’s
independence: “You tend to like doing things on your own.” For the dependent
patient, the therapist can say, “You prefer to have lots of others around you,” or
“You generally try to arrange your life to have consultants or people you can
call on to help you make decisions.” The patient can then be asked whether this
is congruent with their personal view.
The working hypotheses are shared with the patient to foster understanding and collaboration on the most useful approach to change. One technique
for sharing hypotheses is for therapists to make sketches of how they “see” the
patient. These sketches force the therapist to graphically and concretely look at
their conceptualization, to simplify it, and to share that model with the patient.
Consider the following illustrations of sharing the working hypotheses.
Sharing a Working Hypothesis: Don (Vignette 1)
Don, a 52-year-old attorney came for
therapy with diagnoses of avoidant
personality disorder, obsessive compulsive personality disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. He spent
great blocks of time in activities that
he recognized as wasted effort, yet
necessary in his view. The therapist
drew the following sketch with an explanation (Figure 9.1).
Developing a Case Conceptualization 251
Figure 9.1
Search for
Safe
Crossing
Sharing a Working Hypothesis: Don (Vignette 1) (Continued)
Therapist: What you describe is a life
where you want to cross the road.
But you’re afraid that a car will race
down and run you over. So to avoid
that situation, you run a mile to
your left to see if there are any cars
coming. If there are none, you return to your starting point. But you
cannot cross yet, because there may
be danger. You still cannot cross the
road because while you were off to
the left, a car may be coming from
the right. So you spend your life
running miles, but never crossing
the 20 feet of road. The goal of therapy will be to help you find a safe
crossing without so much wasted
effort.
Figure 9.2
A Tenuous
Balance
Sharing a Working Hypothesis: Alicia (Vignette 2)
Alicia, a 29-year-old woman was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. She reported that any stressor
would cause her to “explode.” She had
great difficulty in interpersonal relationships. She appeared to have a
very tenuous balance that was easily
shaken.
The therapist drew the following Figure 9.2).
Therapist: From what you describe, your
life is very difficult. You end up balanced on the pinnacle of the mountain. Most of your energy is spent on
maintaining your balance so as to
avoid falling off the mountain and
being injured or killed.
The patient looked at the drawing
and stated, “That’s exactly how I feel.”
The therapeutic goal is to help Alicia
to have a firmer, more solid base.
252 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Figure 9.3
Family
Power
Structure
Sharing a Working Hypothesis: Marion (Vignette 3)
Marion was the identified patient. She
was 10 years old and was referred by the
school because she had developed a pattern of intimidating others. She tried to
intimidate the teachers and all the children in her class. She would take or
break another child’s things if she did
not get her way. She would throw
tantrums in the classroom if the teacher
frustrated her wishes.
On interviewing the parents, it was
clear that Marion did the same thing at
home. She intimidated her mother and
frightened her younger brother. Her father’s response was to leave for work
early in the morning and return late at
night. He chose to leave the management of Marion to his wife. This was a
task that was difficult for two people,
impossible for one.
The therapist drew the following picture (Figure 9.3).
Therapist: Mother and brother are under
the child’s control. The child is the
biggest figure by virtue of having so
much power. Father is out of the picture. The goals of therapy, in sequence, would be, first, bring father
into the family. Second, bring mother
out from underfoot and have her
team up with father to increase their
power. This would involve helping
them develop more collaborative and
effective parenting skills. The third
step would be to try to help Marion
attain power from less dysfunctional
behaviors. If, instead, the therapist
tried to “shrink” Marion by taking
away some of her power, a struggle
would ensue. If the goal was to empower mother to remove herself from
underfoot without father there to
support her, she would likely be
pushed down again by the child.
However, if father were not available,
the therapist would need to seek resources to support mother. These
might include involving family,
friends, or a support group as supporters. The therapist could be an important support for mother, were
father not available.
Impact of Sharing the Conceptualization
As the therapist begins to share the working hypotheses and further develop
the case conceptualization in partnership with the patient, we can expect
that there will be an impact on the patient. Sharing a conceptualization is
a powerful action that can and likely will destabilize the patient’s familiar patterns. The hope is that this will promote psychological growth and
change.
According to dynamic systems theorists (Caspar, Rothenfluh, & Segal,
1992; L. S. Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993; Mahoney, 1991; Schiepek,
Fricke, & Kaimer, 1992), psychological growth is a lifelong process that is
characterized by periods of stability and instability. Psychopathology, like any
state of being, is viewed as a state of dynamic equilibrium, where the predominant state consists of well organized patterns of cognitive/affective/behavioral and somatic functioning that interfere with the individual’s
well-being and everyday adaptive functioning (Mahoney, 1991). Destabilization is viewed as a necessary and natural process that allows for growth and
change. It is through this “shaking up” process that change can occur. Mahoney (1991) described destabilization as a period of systemwide disorder
marked by increased variability in such domains as thought patterns, affect,
behavior, intimacy, sleep, appetite, and somatic functioning. Given the organism’s natural movement toward stability and balance, the system in disorder
will attempt to move toward order.
In Mahoney’s (1991) dynamic systems perspective, it is natural and
healthy for an individual to resist moving too far and too quickly beyond
familiar patterns, even if those patterns interfere with functioning and
cause distress. Freeman and Leaf (1989) use the metaphor of a safety zone
in explaining the change-related discomfort or avoidance phenomenon.
Normally, each individual lives in a safety zone. The boundaries of the safety
zone are often fairly well defined. For some individuals, the limits of the
safety zone may be the walls of their house or the fence in the front yard.
For others, the safety zone may be defined by certain people or limited
emotional states. Anything outside the safety zone is labeled by the individual as “dangerous” or “threatening.” Approaching the boundaries of the
safety zone will elicit a withdrawal, avoidance, or safety-seeking response. If
the individual stays well within the safety zone, there will be minimum
anxiety.
Movement toward reestablishing order in light of the new conceptualization will occur first by using old, well-established patterns (assimilation),
and if these more practiced behaviors do not work, small incremental
changes will follow (accommodation). Ideally, the therapist can guide and
shape the accommodations by providing the setting (a safe one), the skills
(increased repertoire of techniques), and the support (encouragement of risk
taking) needed for this difficult task. Providing a secure, supportive therapeutic environment and strengthening internal and external resources
can prepare the patient to undergo the destabilization that accompanies reexamining and reorganizing one’s concepts about oneself, other people, and
one’s future.
Developing a Case Conceptualization 253
Summary
The highest order cognitive skill in psychotherapy is the ability to develop
treatment conceptualizations. Too often, therapy is a reactive process; the
therapist responds to what the patient brings into the therapy or the specific
session. Proactive therapy involves a careful evaluation of the patient’s
problems based on a synthesis of the relevant data. Different therapists have
different styles or approaches to building a case conceptualization. The
clinician is the most thorough, incorporating some modified elements of
the more limited styles of the theoretician, the magician, the politician, or
the technician into a more comprehensive and systematic, scientifically
grounded approach.
Case conceptualization is a process of organizing and comprehending
information about each patient. It is based on data and considers the interacting biological, psychological, and social systems of the individual. The
functional purpose of the case conceptualization is to promote the effective
and efficient use of therapeutic resources. The conceptualization begins with
the first bits of information, and as information accumulates, the therapist
develops working hypotheses about why the patients respond the way they
do, what were probable formative elements in the style, what are the operative schemas, and what are the best possible points of entry into the system.
The therapist then shares these working hypotheses with the patient to
gather more information and shape the overall conceptualization. The evolving conceptualization is a guide for determining direction and targets for
therapy.
The core psychological construct in the conceptualization is the patient’s
schemas. The schemas are the organizing templates through which perception
is built. Many schemas occur in complex combinations and permutations. The
schemas may be personal, family, religious, cultural, age-related, or gender related, or any combination of these factors. The schemas become, in effect, how
one defines oneself, both individually, and as part of a group. Schemas are in a
constant state of change, evolution, and activation or deactivation. From the
child’s earliest years, there is a need to alter old schemas and develop new ones
to meet the different and increasingly complex demands of the world. Schemas
are not maladaptive per se, no matter how they are stated. The expression of
the schemas in the person’s life, and the goodness of fit with personal goals and
skills, and with societal expectations are primary concerns in schema activation
and modification.
Working hypotheses provide a concrete way to share the schema
conceptualizations with the patient. This allows the patient to understand
what the therapist understands of their problem and fosters their collaboration on building the most useful conceptualization and approach to change.
A technique for sharing working hypotheses is for therapists to sketch
how they perceive their patients’ problems with some form of metaphor or
graphic example.
When patients are engaged in conceptualizing their own functioning in
new ways, some degree of destabilization can be anticipated. The therapist
254 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
needs to provide structure and support during this process, and understand that
disturbance in the system will produce predictable efforts to reestablish order.
Guiding these efforts within a safe environment is a crucial therapeutic task.
Conceptualization is the backbone of effective and efficient therapy. With
an accurate initial conceptualization, the clinician will be well prepared to implement the subsequent steps of establishing and maintaining a working relationship, selecting intervention techniques, and guiding the overall process of
change.
Developing a Case Conceptualization 255

257
10
Chapter
Developing a Treatment Plan:
Therapeutic Alliance and
Collaborative Goals
Once the clinician has a basic conceptualization of the patient’s difficulties, the next question is, “Where do we go from here?” Two essential elements are needed to establish this direction: A directed plan for treatment and
a collaborating relationship between or among the participants.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Understand the collaborative roles of patient and therapist in a working
alliance.
• Identify three core collaboration skills, why they are important, and how
they are acquired.
• Translate chief complaints into measurable goals.
• Develop a problem list and a comprehensive treatment plan.
• List five techniques for building and maintaining the therapeutic relationship.
• Identify relationship beliefs that interfere with collaboration.
• Identify five indications of a good working relationship.
As we move from the abstract task of conceptualization into a practical
application of treatment methods, it is important to recognize that several participants may have a stake in this transaction. All parties involved in a psychotherapeutic endeavor want the effort to be successful and worthwhile.
258 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Patients want to relieve symptoms and find ways to improve their emotional
and behavioral health. Clinicians want to help others by sharing the knowledge
and technology of psychotherapy. Insurers and third-party payers want a quality service provided at lowest possible cost. Employers want their benefit programs to enhance the stability and productivity of their employees. Significant
others of the patient want relief from their worries and concerns as well as improvement in the patient’s personal functioning. To satisfy these many vested
interests, clinicians must translate the conceptualization into a treatment plan
that will focus on relevant, measurable goals and objectives.
A detailed conceptualization is an important foundation of the treatment
plan, but there are also other components. Clinicians must develop an effective
working relationship with their patients that engages them in their own internal process of psychological change. Rather than simply deciding what must be
done to the patient, psychotherapy clinicians must work with the patient to
forge an agreement concerning the goals and tasks of treatment (Bordin, 1979).
Sufficient intellectual skill and cognitive effort are necessary parts of a treatment process, but interpersonal, emotional, and behavioral skills also are essential to shape those goals into an experience that is deemed worthwhile to all
relevant parties.
Roles of Patient and Therapist
Because the traditional framework of psychotherapy was built on a medical
model, the role of the therapist began as one of a prescriptive expert who selected interventions and applied them to a receptive patient. The patient’s role
within this medical formulary was to be compliant with procedures and dutiful
in following recommendations. The typical clinician was an educated white
male, further reinforcing the broader gender and social stereotype of a dominant authority figure. Only recently has this profile of the provider population
begun to include a representative diversity. Although vestiges of this paternalistic prototype remain, therapeutic roles have shifted toward an egalitarian and
collaborative relationship (e.g., A. T. Beck et al., 2004; A. T. Beck, Rush, Shaw,
& Emery, 1979). In a collaborative partnership, both parties have an active role
in sharing information and developing an overall plan. Collaborative treatment
planning is based on direct and explicit communication about specific problems, goals, techniques, expectations, and informed consent. The therapist’s
role is to guide the process and protect the patient’s best interests. Part of the
therapist’s responsibility is to create and maintain a formal record that is accessible to the patient and available at the patient’s request to inform other
providers who might be involved in the patient’s care.
Many factors that have helped shape this paradigm shift away from an authoritarian power structure toward a more communicating partnership. One
factor is that the general public is more informed about biopsychosocial
processes and treatments, and thus expects a more informed discussion as part
of their experience. Another factor is that consumers have been empowered by
Developing a Treatment Plan 259
laws that stipulate their rights for accessing and controlling private health
care information. In addition, the increasing demand for accessible and costeffective treatment has vastly influenced the need to actively engage the patient as rapidly as possible. Can you think of any other reasons the roles of
patient and therapist have shifted? In what ways do you think that the
provider-patient relationship has retained a hierarchical power structure?
Importance of Collaboration Skills
Being able to engage patients in working together productively (the “working
alliance”) and maintaining a collaborative focus throughout treatment are fundamental to successful therapy. Evidence from the past several decades of psychotherapy research consistently supports the importance of these basic
ingredients. Approximately 30% of the variance in patient outcome in psychotherapy can be accounted for by relationship factors that are common
across different types or techniques of therapy (Lambert & Barley, 2002;
Wampold, 2001). The common factors in psychotherapy, as defined by Frank
and Frank (1991, p. 30), are (a) an emotionally charged, confiding relationship
with a helping person; (b) a healing setting; (c) a conceptualization; and (d) a
set of procedures based on the conceptualization that requires active participation of patient and therapist.
As this definition of common factors shows, the theoretical conceptualization and associated procedures are fundamental aspects of therapy, yet there is
also a context of active participation in a healing enterprise. The interactions
between patient and therapist, and their respective cognitive and emotional reactions to these exchanges are typically referred to as the process component of
therapy. In a review of over 2,300 empirical studies, Orlinsky, Grawe, and Parks
(1994) concluded that patient participation is the single most important element of therapy process and has the greatest single impact on the eventual outcome. Patients will participate more effectively when therapists fully set the
stage with specific techniques in the context of an encouraging, positive relationship. Intervention techniques such as exposure or cognitive restructuring
are important, but their impact can be enhanced, diminished, neutralized, or
otherwise altered by the interpersonal and emotional relationship between patient and therapist. Similarly, the results that may be achieved through strategic
use of specific techniques can reinforce a basically positive therapeutic alliance
with confidence, hope, and mastery. Thus, technical strategies and relationship
factors are interdependent parts in a single psychotherapy process (Safran, McMain, Crocker, & Murray, 1990; Safran & Segal, 1990).
The ability to establish and maintain collaboration with the patient is perhaps best considered as a set of skills that therapists develop and refine through
training and experience. Although therapy interactions are complex and multifaceted, research has spotlighted key features and skills of effective therapists.
As we might expect, therapists who are viewed by their patients as helpful interact in a positive manner, show interest, attempt to make patients feel comfortable, offer encouragement and reassurance, instill hope, show sensitivity to
patient feelings, and focus on practical assistance in problem solving and coping
260 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
(Maluccio, 1979; McLeod, 1990). Cognitive-behavioral therapists tend to be
more active and directive than therapists of other orientations, but they also
communicate more support via encouragement, recognition of patient effort
and progress, and reinforcing statements (Keijers, Schaap, & Hoogduin, 2000).
Empathy, warmth, and genuineness, some of the earliest factors identified
as key to an effective therapeutic encounter, are just as relevant in cognitivebehavioral treatments (Beutler, Machado, & Allstetter Neufeldt, 1994; Keijers
et al., 2000). Empathy may be communicated by acknowledgment or inquiry
about the patient’s emotions, along with statements that reflect acceptance or
understanding of those emotions, without criticism or judgment. Behaviors
that communicate genuineness include being consistent, nondefensive, relaxed, honest, and interested (Egan, 1998). Warmth may be conveyed through
respectful actions and statements, encouragement, and recognition of client effort and progress (Serran, Fernandez, Marshall, & Mann, 2003).
Acquiring Core Skills of Collaboration
It is relatively easy to identify positive interpersonal qualities that characterize
an effective therapist. But ask yourself these questions: Do you think that these
qualities can be taught or acquired? Why does the therapist care about his or
her patients? How was this capacity acquired or learned? What does it take to
become confident as a therapist? Can this be learned? What about being coherent in one’s approach to therapy? Is there a manual that discriminates therapist
coherence from incoherence?
Typically, the developmental trajectory of a psychotherapist is long and demanding emotionally, physically, and financially. Therapists accumulate hundreds of hours of supervised experience over several years prior to independent
work. To attain the privilege of offering services to the general public, clinicians
must acquire sufficient knowledge and self-control and become acculturated to
professional standards. During the course of training, one learns to recognize
and productively direct the dynamic emotional components of psychotherapy,
including the thread of his or her own affective contributions. Emotional experiences of novice therapists often include anxious arousal (feeling tense or
guarded; freezing), uncertainty (“I’m not sure what to do,”), self-doubt (“I’m
probably doing this wrong,”), and a search for a sense of competence (“I wonder
what my strengths really are”).
The tasks of collaboration can loom large for novice clinicians. First, they
have to elicit trust and confidence from a virtual stranger. Then they have to
decide which interventions might be relevant for a particular patient, and skillfully apply them in a context of emotional arousal. If that isn’t difficult
enough, these unpolished efforts then have to be presented to an authority, the
supervisor, who will observe and formally evaluate the quality and effectiveness of the interaction and plan. Often apprenticing therapists receive a formal
academic grade for their performance of this challenging work. The demands of
this learning process can directly conflict with the expression of empathy,
warmth, genuineness, and the productive emotional connection that maximizes patient participation.
Developing a Treatment Plan 261
Over the course of embracing this challenge, core collaboration skills are
forged, and together with core technical skills, are woven into an overall competence and effectiveness. These skills are conceptualized as caring, coherence,
and confidence.
Caring
Literally hundreds of empirical studies support the conclusion that emotional
involvement and caring on the part of the therapist is a crucial ingredient to
successful therapy (Horvath & Symonds, 1991; D. J. Martin, Garske, & Davis,
2000; Orlinsky et al., 1994; Safran & Muran, 1995). Even in structured treatments (e.g., in vivo exposure, behavioral marital therapy), or those applied to
specific problems (problem drinking; sex offenses), patients who view their
therapist as warm and empathetic are more involved in their treatment and ultimately have a better outcome (e.g., Holtzworth-Munroe, Jacobson, DeKlyen,
& Whisman, 1989; Miller, Taylor, & West, 1980; Serran et al., 2003).
A great deal of the emotional charge to the therapy relationship is activated or deactivated, by the patient’s belief that the therapist cares. The therapist must find effective ways to establish this vital link in the working alliance.
There is no universal operational definition of caring, so we must rely on basic
strategies and be mindful whether our patients have received the intended message. Further, we must attend to our own emotional state, and be alert to any
factors that diminish the care that is intended, felt, and communicated to the
patient.
Some basic strategies for establishing and communicating a sense of caring
include treating the patient with respect as a person, responding directly and
promptly to patient inquiries and requests, asking for feedback, anticipating
possible difficulties or inconveniences, and allocating sufficient attention and
energy toward the patient (Wright & Davis, 1994). Therapists who show interest, offer encouragement and reassurance, instill hope, and offer practical assistance for increasing problem solving and coping are seen by their patients as
being most helpful (McLeod, 1990).
The notion of treating the patient with respect as a person is a broad concept, and readers are encouraged to explore varied contexts for interpreting
what this means to people from different cultures and walks of life. Greeting
the patient at the appointed time with a friendly remark and including a formal address at the first meeting can establish basic respect and caring for the
person’s dignity (e.g., “Good morning, Mr. Jones. Are you ready to come into
my office now?”). Providing a comfortable environment for meeting that is
both private and free from distractions also demonstrates respect. Unexpected
intrusions, distractions, or delays should be discussed in such a way as to
apologize for any inconvenience to the patient, and an attempt should be
made to protect the planned meeting. Similarly, presenting oneself as attentive, well rested, and focused on the patient’s concerns demonstrates caring
and respect for the trust given to you. In more traditional or psychodynamic
orientations, this might be referred to as the therapeutic “frame” and is attended to quite scrupulously.
262 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Behaviors that may deactivate the patient’s belief that the therapist cares
include overstructuring therapy, inappropriate self-disclosures, rigid use of
transference interpretation, inappropriate use of silence, criticism, hostile tone
or content, personal tension or distraction (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2001), or
confrontational approaches (Marshall et al., 2002). Confrontational approaches
that include aggressive criticism and sarcasm are thought to be especially
harmful to clients who have low self-esteem or are at the precontemplation
stage of change (Serran et al., 2003). The patient who experiences the therapist
as confrontational is likely to discredit or challenge the therapist, dismiss or devalue the issues, or agree on the surface but actually fail to participate (Cormier
& Cormier, 1991).
How therapists personally develop internal feelings of caring for the patient, or fail to experience caring, is certainly a complex question. From a therapist’s developmental perspective, we might predict that nascent skills require
Clinical Example 1
At the end of his third session, Frank
and his therapist were reviewing the
treatment plan and Frank shared the
following impressions about his experience thus far. “I would very much like
to continue with this plan because it
makes sense (coherence), it sounds
promising (confidence), but most importantly, I really get the feeling that
you care. You’ve been very up front,
explained things, answered my phone
calls and my questions, and the way
that you seem to approach things says
that you are on my side. Someone
might be really smart or well known in
their field, but if you can’t get the feeling that they care about you, then there
isn’t much point in continuing because
it just isn’t going to work.”
Clinical Example 2
Chet and his therapist were working on
a list of stress triggers when he described a series of hassles with other
service providers. “First, I find out my
hair-stylist is going to be working parttime at a distant location, and I think,
Oh great, now he won’t have time to
see me. Then, my massage therapist
moved and they called me and now her
schedule is all messed up, and I can’t
have my regular time. And my favorite
exercise class was suddenly canceled.”
Having just relocated her office as well,
the therapist inquired whether Chet
had also felt stressed out about the
change in therapy venue. He replied,
“No, I really didn’t worry about this.
You were very clear and reassuring
about this change. You told me just
when the move was happening, where
to come, how to get here and where to
park, and that my appointment time
would stay the same. I didn’t fee


nclude overstructuring therapy, inappropriate self-disclosures, rigid use of
transference interpretation, inappropriate use of silence, criticism, hostile tone
or content, personal tension or distraction (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2001), or
confrontational approaches (Marshall et al., 2002). Confrontational approaches
that include aggressive criticism and sarcasm are thought to be especially
harmful to clients who have low self-esteem or are at the precontemplation
stage of change (Serran et al., 2003). The patient who experiences the therapist
as confrontational is likely to discredit or challenge the therapist, dismiss or devalue the issues, or agree on the surface but actually fail to participate (Cormier
& Cormier, 1991).
How therapists personally develop internal feelings of caring for the patient, or fail to experience caring, is certainly a complex question. From a therapist’s developmental perspective, we might predict that nascent skills require
Clinical Example 1
At the end of his third session, Frank
and his therapist were reviewing the
treatment plan and Frank shared the
following impressions about his experience thus far. “I would very much like
to continue with this plan because it
makes sense (coherence), it sounds
promising (confidence), but most importantly, I really get the feeling that
you care. You’ve been very up front,
explained things, answered my phone
calls and my questions, and the way
that you seem to approach things says
that you are on my side. Someone
might be really smart or well known in
their field, but if you can’t get the feeling that they care about you, then there
isn’t much point in continuing because
it just isn’t going to work.”
Clinical Example 2
Chet and his therapist were working on
a list of stress triggers when he described a series of hassles with other
service providers. “First, I find out my
hair-stylist is going to be working parttime at a distant location, and I think,
Oh great, now he won’t have time to
see me. Then, my massage therapist
moved and they called me and now her
schedule is all messed up, and I can’t
have my regular time. And my favorite
exercise class was suddenly canceled.”
Having just relocated her office as well,
the therapist inquired whether Chet
had also felt stressed out about the
change in therapy venue. He replied,
“No, I really didn’t worry about this.
You were very clear and reassuring
about this change. You told me just
when the move was happening, where
to come, how to get here and where to
park, and that my appointment time
would stay the same. I didn’t feel I was
left hanging in any way.”
Developing a Treatment Plan 263
a degree of self-preoccupation that could interfere with the experience and expression of caring. In general, therapists are most likely to be helpful when
happy and unhurried (Myers, 1996). However, the demands of clinical training
do not typically create a leisurely, feel-good experience.
It is difficult to be genuine or fully empathic with the experiences of
another when mental tensions or personal concerns are intruding on the therapist’s awareness. Questions of what to do next, how to implement a technique, whether one is measuring up to the model of the manual, concern for
the performance demands of supervision and evaluation, as well as general
personal concerns about career opportunities or stability (e.g., “Are there any
decent jobs left in applied practice?” or “Maybe I should just concentrate on
research or teaching”) are typical among novice clinicians. These concerns become part of the context in which the therapist perceives and thinks about the
patient. Novice therapists may care passionately about their patients, but they
also need to feel some internal stability in their self-confidence and selfdirection. They are most likely to feel a sense of caring for patients whom they
can understand and help. Patients who are quite different from themselves
are likely to be the most challenging. Patients with multiple problems, or
those who are slow to change will not offer the same level of self-satisfaction
that the therapist might hope for as reinforcement for the effort of caring. If
other system challenges such as paperwork overload or low pay provoke the
therapist to question his or her commitment to this professional role (“Is law
school still an option?”), this relative detachment might lead to a decrease in
the emotional intensity of caring.
Therapists who receive their clinical training in a program with strong
research emphasis may be especially vulnerable to a double bind in caring
about their patients. Their emotional involvement with applied clinical practice may be treated, overtly or covertly, as an impediment to the priority of research productivity. They may feel guilty for the time involved in clinical
work, disloyal to their advisors or faculty when gaining satisfaction from
working with patients, and perhaps fearful that clinical involvement will significantly compromise their research progress. Moreover, there may be internal personal conflict about their professional identity as they consider career
plans and options. They may be gratified by the emotional experience of caring, yet reluctant to openly admit these feelings. They may fear the disapproval of academic mentors or feel alienated from their own internalized
ideals of becoming an academic psychologist. Anticipating this potential bind,
the training program can endeavor to validate the emotional experience of
the trainees, support the importance of caring and role of the clinical therapist, and encourage opportunities for integrating research and practice
throughout the training program.
Taken together, these factors illustrate why burnout is a notable risk
for novice psychologists. Such therapists have less experience, fewer wellestablished skills but high demand work roles, and are more apt to have role
conflict and role ambiguity. Caregiver burnout can occur at any career stage,
and may also be a notable risk in middle to late career if skills have eroded, or
personal stressors significantly interfere with work focus. The issue of burnout
across the career is discussed further in Chapter 15.
264 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Coherence
The treatment plan must be presented in a way that is coherent to the patient,
and consistent with the problem conceptualization. Patients are apt to lose
trust in the therapy or in the therapist if the rationale for intervention is unclear or if the proposed techniques do not make sense, based on the patient’s
personal theory of problem origin.
If a therapist offers vague, stereotyped, or overly intellectualized recommendations, if they switch techniques abruptly or fail to provide a rationale, or
if they are insensitive to the patient’s cultural worldview, patients can lose
hope and think of their therapist as incompetent or uncaring. Both underexplaining and overexplaining are risks to treatment coherence. Patients who
switch from one therapist to another, perhaps seeking a different “brand” of
therapy, may do this because there is no coherent plan to the therapy.
Clinical Example 3
Ellen, a 38-year-old mother and health
care professional sought therapy for
anxiety, panic attacks, and phobias. She
explained that she had been in supportive therapy for over 2 years, and although her therapist was very pleasant
and sensitive as a listener, the therapy
seemed to lack direction or purpose.
Ellen wanted to learn ways to overcome her phobias and panic attacks, but
did not see how her current therapy,
which consisted of repetitive discussions of her childhood and her relationships with her parents, was helping her
to accomplish these objectives. The
connection between these discussions
about her past relationships and her
current symptoms was fuzzy and inconsistent with her worries about having a chemical imbalance or physical
disease.
Ellen’s therapist acknowledged
the previous therapist’s efforts as a
relationship-focused approach that
is helpful in some instances of anxiety
disorder. She then offered a brief
rationale for an alternative approach
focusing on thoughts, feelings, and
beliefs associated with different body
sensations, particularly unexpected
sensations. By not directly criticizing
or discrediting the previous therapy,
Ellen’s new therapist fostered continuing confidence in treatment in general
and provided an acceptable rationale
for Ellen to discriminate past from current experience. Further, the therapist
engendered a coping model by acknowledging that it made sense to try
the former approach, but given Ellen’s
view of her problems, it also made
sense to try different tactics.
Confidence
Confidence is important for both therapist and patient, but it is not very effective to simply demand or expect confidence in yourself, or from your patients.
Rather than coaxing with a directive to “have confidence,” it may be more productive to review the ways that you can increase (or decrease) confidence in
the therapy process, in your therapy skills, and in the application of specific
skills with specific people.
First, therapists who hold positive beliefs about the value of therapy in
general, and about the potential usefulness of specific techniques will be more
Developing a Treatment Plan 265
likely to communicate this confidence to the patient. For general confidence, it
may be helpful to recall that a substantial body of empirical research across different forms of psychotherapy has shown that approximately 80% of those
treated will realize positive effects (Wampold, 2001). For specific techniques,
the number of studies demonstrating positive effects with different disorders
grows every year, and can quickly be accessed with a directed literature search.
Continuing education in its various forms can help therapists stay up to date on
the latest empirical findings that support specific techniques and interventions,
and thus boost their confidence in making recommendations and encouraging
the patient to look for potential benefit in the treatment.
Confidence in individual therapy skills and specific technical skills with different disorders is typically acquired through accumulated experience, evidence
from the outcomes of that experience, formal evaluations, informal feedback and
observing the work of others. For beginning therapists, or those unfamiliar with
a particular disorder, this discovery process begins with the first patient, where
feedback from the patient and his or her clinical response, as well as selfobservation and supervision guide the systematic building of assurance and belief
in both technique and ability. Errors are recognized and corrective actions taken.
Some degree of confidence is built on learning the hard way what not to do.
With further experience comes the ability to recognize limits and to communicate appropriate reservations and consideration of alternatives without
undue doubt or hesitation. Therapists who communicate a “coping” perspective
(e.g., “We can work together systematically to see what works and what
doesn’t”) engender a stronger bond and more effective results than those who
project a “mastery” perspective (e.g., “I have to come up with the answers to
fix your problems”; Kassinove & Tafrate, 2002; Mahoney & Norcross, 1993).
Thus, the confident therapist is apt to hold the following beliefs: “Therapy is
generally worthwhile and useful if conducted in a professional manner”; “Specific techniques tested with similar patients may be beneficial to this patient”;
and most importantly, “I am capable of working with this patient to apply these
techniques in the interest of his or her personal goals; the evidence will help us
decide what works best for this individual.”
These beliefs, or similar ones, will help the therapist achieve a paramount objective, which is to help the patient comprehend and test the conceptualization as an authentic explanation for their problems, or means for
achieving their goals. This builds the patient’s confidence in both the therapist
and the activities that the two will undertake in service of the patient’s objectives. Patient confidence is apt to have a reinforcing effect on the therapist,
who will then more confidently encourage the patient to undertake the specific tasks of therapy.
It is not unusual for patients to have doubts about therapy, particularly as it
may apply to their particular problems. Gentle suggestion is often sufficient
to encourage the patient to “give this approach a fair try.” The structured
cognitive-behavioral approach is helpful in this regard, as there are typically
points of evaluation and feedback both during sessions, and across the course of
treatment. Some patients will be much more skeptical, however, and may repeatedly demand to know what the therapy is going to do for them. At the points of
pressure, it is crucial that therapists not allow this challenge and the subsequent
266 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
arousal it may provoke to puncture their confidence. The confident therapist will
most likely encourage persistence and focus on the treatment strategies.
This persistence under pressure of doubt and demand from the patient
both emanates from and reinforces a more general confidence in structured
treatment, and one’s ability to conduct that treatment. At times of challenge,
the therapist can also amplify efforts to demonstrate caring, and to maintain a
clear and coherent rationale for treatment. A confident therapist will reflect on
the clinical implications of the patient’s doubts and demands for certainty and
use this information to sharpen the problem conceptualization.
Clinical Example 4
Melody, a psychology intern, reported
to her supervisor that she was feeling
increasingly anxious and depressed
about her rotation in the mental health
center family services. She had even experienced a few panic attacks, although
these occurred on weekends, times
when she hoped to be relaxing but instead worried about her clinical caseload and client progress, or lack thereof.
Melody’s graduate training had emphasized critical thinking skills and she
was well versed in pinpointing empirical
weaknesses or flaws in the existing literature. On her internship, however, she
felt overwhelmed by the demands of
conceptualizing cases and developing
treatment plans. She was often flooded
with negative thoughts about the limitations of various forms of therapy. Before
and after sessions, she might think,
“There’s no way I can make a difference
with this family.” During staff meetings
when cases were assigned, she would try
to avoid accepting new clients because
most of them had problems for which
there is no tested protocol. Her clients
typically had numerous problems, only
some of which could be addressed with
standard manualized therapy. Melody
had very little confidence in the potential benefit of her efforts, in part because
her attention was highly focused on
treatment limitations, and she was easily
discouraged by complicating variables.
Melody agreed to develop more of a
coping perspective in her work, and
with her supervisor’s guidance, focus
on increasing her basic collaborative
skills. Rather than trying to fit patients
into a prototype, she planned to work
with each client on targeting a specific
list of problems, and then to apply different treatment strategies with those
problems one at a time. Together she
and her supervisor worked out a plan
for Melody to respond to her “empirical
critic” thoughts with encouraging alternatives (e.g., “I have some ideas to try
in this session and can test how they
work”; “I’m sure I can find one idea that
may be helpful to offer to this client today”; “There is no definite reason to believe that therapy can’t help this person,
especially if it is based on empirically
supported models and makes good use
of the common ingredients”).
Sometimes therapists undermine their own confidence through the distortion of “idealizing the masters.” This occurs when the therapist comes to believe
that others, perhaps those who have lectured or shared positive clinical examples in a public forum, are especially gifted in ways that they are not. When confronted with a difficult clinical situation, therapists may attribute fault to some
internal inadequacy and harbor the belief that the clinical master would have no
Developing a Treatment Plan 267
difficulty in such a predicament. Thus, therapists may systematically engage in a
judgment of their personal efforts as inferior compared with the imagined efforts of a master, slowing down their own effective problem solving and weakening their self-confidence. Like doubts about the therapy process, a coping
perspective is needed for confidence to build. It may also be important to consider the alternative notion that clinical challenges are difficult for everyone,
even highly experienced clinicians. Therapists must allow themselves to have
confidence of effort, even though they may not feel like an expert.
Goals and Tasks of Treatment
The cornerstones of a treatment plan are the goals and tasks that patient and
therapist select. Treatment goals, quite simply, are the changes that the patient
hopes to realize. Through the processes of assessment and conceptualization,
the therapist helps the patient shape an operational definition of the goals in
terms of something that is observable, measurable, and can be increased or decreased. Therapists may propose additional goals for the patient’s consideration,
based on their professional judgment of what may be in the patient’s best interest, with an emphasis on supporting the greatest degree of patient autonomy.
The tasks of treatment are the strategies that will be used to achieve the
goals. These are the strategies and techniques that the therapist will offer and
explain, and that the patient will either accept or decline. From the list of
changes desired by the patient, the therapist will outline a corresponding list of
tools and strategies, and will help the patient apply these interventions and
evaluate the impact. Agreement between patient and therapist on these goals
and tasks is crucial to the success of treatment, and as noted, lack of agreement
will decrease the patient’s participation and undermine the positive emotional
charge of the therapy.
Translating Chief Complaints into Measurable Goals
Beginning at intake interview, the patient cites problems, symptoms, and reasons
for seeking therapy. The provider then attempts to discover what the client hopes
to gain from therapy, and what results are desired. Often, the patient’s response
is framed in terms of cessation of the symptom or complaint (e.g., to “stop procrastinating”). Sometimes the patient’s stated objective is vague and global, as in
“get my old self back,” or “get my head together,” or “to be a happier person.”
Occasionally, the patient may have no goal for therapy other than
to show up. Someone else may think that the patient should be in therapy, so
the goal is to make that other person happy or to get out of trouble by going
to therapy. The patient may show up with the mistaken belief that going to
therapy and complaining about others will somehow change those people.
Sometimes, therapy is sought for self-enhancement, motivated by curiosity
about one’s psychological functioning, or perhaps motivated by an attempt to
cultivate social status through an accumulation of relationships with supposedly stylish service providers.
268 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
In every instance, it is important to specify treatment goals in operational
terms. This will focus the treatment on a purpose and ensure agreement between patient and therapist for the intended aims. One type of operational goal
might be the reduction of a specific symptom or set of symptoms (e.g., panic attacks less than once per month; depressed mood reduced to mild range or less
on symptom index). Another type of operational goal might be achievement of
a specific task or set of tasks (e.g., fly cross-country on a commercial flight; attend family functions, become more socially active with friends).
Operational goals can also incorporate broader emotional experiences such
as achieving more satisfaction in marriage or living a more peaceful, joyful, and
less worried day-to-day life, or functioning better in a particular role (e.g., being
an effective parent). The details of an operational definition for a broader goal
would typically have specific behavioral reference points with meaning and relevance to the patient. These reference points may not be known at the beginning
of therapy, for the task of therapy is to explore and define the behavioral targets.
For one patient, a joyful life might be having time to exercise and plant flowers.
For another, a joyful life might be found in more challenging work and greater
self-discipline. For yet another patient, joy might be discovered by learning how
to defuse the mental process of worry and accept a range of emotions in daily living. Similarly, the goal of being a better parent is anchored in meaning and relevance to the patient, in the context of the particular challenges being addressed.
For one parent, this might mean increasing the number of positive and nondisciplinary interactions. For another, it might mean tolerating some conflict in the
interest of applying more consistent limits and age-appropriate demands.
Agreements and Contracts
It is important to begin formulating a direction and plan for therapy from the
initial contact. A preliminary formulation might be offered in the first meeting,
with the provision that this plan will be updated as more information is gathered and progress is made. It is also useful to establish a written summary of
the initial treatment plan, both to facilitate the agreement of both (or all) parties, and to keep a record of the intended aims of the work.
Therapists may differ in whether they have the patient sign a written treatment plan, or rely primarily on verbal collaboration and keep a written record
for their own purposes. Some believe that formal contracting enhances motivation and adherence with treatment procedures, as well as provides a reminder to
the patient about treatment options and contingencies that may be forgotten
over time or under stress (Otto, Reilly-Harrington, Kogan, & Winett, 2003).
Others find that the verbal agreement is sufficient and appropriate, especially
with patients who present in the early stages of change (see Chapter 12). The
patient’s state of readiness for change has a big impact on how the treatment
plan is perceived. Reluctant or uncertain patients who are tentative about therapy and just beginning to think about change may react negatively to contracts
and consent forms. Asking them to sign a written treatment plan could strain
the working alliance beyond a critical tipping point and cause a retreat from
therapy. Verbal agreement to try a limited treatment plan may offer a better way
to engage the uncertain patient. If the patient is fully committed to change and
Developing a Treatment Plan 269
ready to begin planning action, the patient’s homework might include writing
parts of a treatment plan. This encourages patients to function as their own
therapist, with the professional providing consultation. We prefer to keep in
mind the heuristic of treating patients, not pieces of paper, and remain flexible
in how we formally organize the plan for treatment.
An example of a comprehensive treatment plan is illustrated in Box 10.1.
Client assets and potential obstacles to motivation are included, along with a
list of problems and general strategies to use in addressing those problems. The
addition of a specified time frame is helpful for sketching a target for completion, although this may not be clear in every instance.
As noted, having the patient review and sign the document is optional. The
therapist may still use the same or similar written format for record-keeping
purposes, but present the ideas verbally to confirm the patient’s agreement and
collaboration. In either case, the treatment plan is discussed, and the patient’s
informed consent obtained. This discussion is noted in the progress record, including reference to a review of the risks, potential benefits, alternatives, and
any pertinent concerns of the patient. It may be appropriate to expand, or update this plan as more information is gathered, the patient progresses in readiness for change, or as initial problems recede and new problems emerge.
Clinical Example 5
David, a 33-year-old business professional came to therapy because of longstanding mild to moderate depression.
His problem list included loneliness,
procrastination, and anxiety about his
work performance. In his initial interviews, it was also noted that he often
coped with stress by drinking alcohol,
sometimes more than 5 drinks in one
episode. However, he was conscious
of his health, was of normal weight,
maintained an exercise program of
running and biking, and had always
been a nonsmoker. His most recent
physical checkup was 4 months prior,
and he was evaluated as free from any
major health problems other than depression. When asked about his goals
for therapy, he stated that he wanted to
“be in control of my life and get over
this depression.”
David’s therapist summarized the
assets that might facilitate his progress
as his good physical health, stable employment with adequate health care
benefits, and his motivation to engage
in a process of self-change. The challenges that might interfere with progress or prolong treatment included his
long-standing social isolation (no family nearby, few social contacts, no
friends in the area), his tendency to
cope with stress by drinking, often
alone, his prolonged work hours, and
the persistent duration of his depression. They agreed to the general goals
of increasing his sense of control over
his work life, his social life, and his
mood. The provider explained that
they would focus on understanding
and altering the learned response patterns, that is the thoughts, beliefs, actions, and feelings that were associated
with each of these problem areas.
270 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Box 10.1
Comprehensive Treatment Plan
Name
Date of First Visit
Assets facilitating treatment:
Barriers or challenges potentially interfering with treatment:
Problem List:
Goals: Methods: Initial Time Frame:
Patient Informed Consent and Participation
I have discussed this plan with Dr. , understand it, and
with my full and informed consent agree to the course of action outlined above.
Patient Signature Date
Developing a Treatment Plan 271
Selecting the Initial Problem for Intervention
After setting out the general direction of therapy, the next logical question is
“What is the best place to begin with the list of problems?” Several considerations will help focus this important step. The first consideration is the relative
level of the patient’s overall functional impairment and degree of activation.
For those who are more severely impaired and functioning poorly in basic role
expectations, it is important to initially focus on remediation of functional
deficits in activity level. First, patients often find it easier to grasp the idea of
taking a specific action as a place to start, in favor of the more abstract task of
working with thoughts and beliefs. Second, it may relieve the patient’s anxiety
somewhat to have a concrete plan to do something, as this supports feelings of
control, empowerment, and hope. Third, changes in behavior, even small ones,
often precipitate a ripple effect on functioning overall, bringing a large measure
of relief relative to the effort expended.
There are two other significant considerations in picking initial target
problems. One is the importance of the problem for the patient’s self-esteem
and personal responsibility, and the other is the urgency or potential risk of the
problem. Any problem that is potentially life-threatening should be addressed
immediately and sufficiently. Beyond life threat, any problem that is apt to develop into a crisis and could put someone else at risk, or significantly harm the
patient’s stability would be a definite priority. If a depressed mother reports
spending her day in bed while her children “sleep,” watch television, or “play
on their own,” her level of interaction with the children and childcare support
need to be addressed immediately.
With this in mind, it is also important to rapidly address the primary issues
that the patient wants to address in therapy, the chief concerns that precipitated
the decision to seek service. Many times, the area of crisis is the problem of greatest risk, and both patient and therapist agree on the priority of treatment. If there
is disagreement, there may be a way to acknowledge the patient’s priorities while
focusing on a key neglected issue. If the depressed mother presents her biggest
concern as her weight and she acknowledges the parenting issue only peripherally,
it may be possible to link the two problems to a similar initial intervention. She
could be offered the option of working on both problems at the same time through
behavioral activation, perhaps by taking the children to an indoor or outdoor playground. Without criticism, the therapist must bring the patient’s attention to the
neglected problem and activate a process of considering change. Therapists must
also know the boundaries of neglect or endangerment that would precipitate some
further directive action such as involving child protective services.
Clinical Example 6
Let’s return to the discussion of David,
the depressed businessman. Once the
general goals of therapy were agreed
on, David’s therapist asked him to describe the elements of each problem
area that he wished to better control,
to develop a clearer, more operational
view of the nondepressed life he wished
(continued)
272 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Building and Maintaining the Therapeutic Relationship
The therapist’s opportunity to build and maintain a relationship with the patient begins with the very first contact, often over the telephone, and continues
throughout the duration of active contact. Each interaction represents another
chance to construct and extend a positive relationship by attending carefully to
the interaction. Even the best plans for treatment are worth little if there is not
a sufficiently positive therapeutic relationship to support the patient’s involvement in the treatment. As noted by Carkhuff (2000), the tools of observing and
listening are essential to the relationship process. It is difficult if not impossible
to build a positive therapeutic relationship without a strong foundation of basic
active listening skills.
A collaborative relationship is built not only through keen observation,
but also by providing a caring and thoughtful response to what has been seen
and heard. The therapist does not just passively absorb all the patient’s complaints, as nontherapists sometimes imagine when they wonder how someone
can sit and listen to problems all day long. Instead, the therapist is actively focusing attention and processing information at multiple levels to both synthesize information and foster a positive, friendly interpersonal exchange. The
following techniques can be used as a framework for general relationship
building within therapy. Not surprisingly, these techniques also work well in
developing relationships across many other contexts.
Clinical Example 6 (Continued)
to achieve. At first, he responded with
more global answers to the therapist’s
inquiries. For example, when asked
what he wanted to better control at
work, he stated that he wanted to “get
things done when they should be done.”
From this, the therapist gently persisted
in obtaining further detail that would
pinpoint a more specific and measurable target by asking what particular
things David needed to be getting done
now that had been put off.
With this directed questioning, David
listed some specific tasks at work such
as his quarterly budget reports, his purchasing requests, some written correspondence, and meetings he needed to
schedule. The therapist then introduced
the techniques of graded tasks to help
him initiate changes in his behavior,
and guided discovery to explore potential thoughts or circumstances interfering with execution of these desired
tasks. Feedback from David was requested, to check his understanding,
motivation, and involvement in the
agreed tasks, as well as to elicit any further interfering thoughts or possible
negative reactions to the therapist or the
therapeutic exchange.
David felt a large measure of relief
from scheduling a few specific tasks
that he had avoided and neglected, thus
improving his work performance. Work
problems were addressed first as this
was central to his self-esteem, identity,
and overall stability. Poor work performance, missed deadlines, or a bad work
review would likely have a serious
destabilizing impact overall, and thus
presented a greater risk relative to his
other ongoing problems.
Developing a Treatment Plan 273
Softly Focus Attention on the Patient
Deliberately and mindfully focusing on the patient directs energy toward the
therapeutic relationship. For most people, this is a pleasant and perhaps rare experience. This focused attention should be soft and friendly, not harsh or judgmental. Kindly and patiently taking in as many details of the patient’s
presentation as possible, both verbal and nonverbal, communicates a message of
accepting and valuing the patient as an individual. However, the therapist’s pace,
tone, and nonverbal body language should avoid extremes of intensity and be responsive to the patient’s nonverbal cues. Staring at the patient, scowling, or gathering information in an interrogating manner can foil the positive relationship,
as can being too soft or diminutive. Keen observations of the patient’s posture,
facial expressions, tone of voice, dress and grooming, and flow of conversation
can provide important clues to the emotional content of communications. These
observations support the accuracy of the conceptualization, which is vital to validating the patient’s feelings and allowing them to feel understood.
Resist Distractions
It is difficult to build a relationship when you are only partially present in the
interaction. Although distractions are inevitable, you can make efforts to reduce, prevent, and resist the division of your attention while in the presence of
your patient. All conversations with others besides the patient should stop, including covert conversations with yourself or others about unrelated matters.
It is important to note your internal reactions and hypotheses while talking with the patient, but the focus of the provider’s attention is still with the
patient. Problems in being distracted by nonpatient concerns may be a function
of a temporary state (e.g., fatigue or illness), and may be dealt with coping tools
appropriate to the distraction. For example, you might take medication to alleviate symptoms of an illness or make it a point to be sufficiently rested before
work. For most distractions, an appropriate coping remedy can be tried. If the
distraction cannot be delayed for the duration of the session, that is a good indication of a need to cancel or reschedule the meeting.
If the distraction seems to be triggered by contact with the patient, a conceptual review of the interaction and emotional reactions is warranted, perhaps with clinical consultation. The distraction is not due to a circumstance of
the therapist (e.g., “I need to be home with my sick child”), but rather is a function of something happening in the therapy (e.g., “the client is being tangential
again and I’m getting bored and irritated”). If the therapist ignores or indulges
the distraction by letting attention wander away from the patient for extended
segments of time, the patient may detect this break in connection and respond
with corresponding emotional detachment.
Recall Information about the Patient
The more that the therapist can remember about the details of the patient’s world
and life experience, the more the patient will feel known, understood, and hopefully accepted by the therapist. The feeling of closeness and trust begins when the
274 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
patient first shares details of self. This bond of trust grows much stronger when
the therapist demonstrates having retained an actual memory of this information.
Recall of family members’ names, critical events, or important relationships all
suggest a degree of attention and emotional involvement associated with a personal relationship with the inference that the therapist cares about the patient.
Disclosure of information about oneself can enhance a therapeutic bond,
but this must be done carefully in the service of the therapeutic objectives. Judicious sharing of selected personal information can contribute to identification and feelings of trust in the best circumstances. However, significant clinical
and ethical implications must be considered to ensure that the patient’s best interests remain the focus and harm does not occur (Barnett, 1998).
A therapist might disclose to Mrs. Green that like her, she also has two sisters, and this enhances their bond because of a sense of shared experience. Mrs.
Green now believes that she and her therapist share something in common, and
her therapist understands her unique experiences. However, if Mrs. Green was
always the caretaker of her two younger siblings, it may not be useful for her to
know that the therapist was the youngest in her sibling group. Now Mrs. Green
begins to project the image of “little sister” onto her therapist, and directs her attention to unnecessary and unhelpful caretaking actions. She worries if the therapist is comfortable, happy, or eating enough. If not watchful, the therapist may
progress down the slippery slope and allow valuable therapy time to be diverted
toward the therapist’s personal needs and concerns. Mrs. Green’s therapist might
be more effective in building a strong relationship bond through her efforts to remember details about the adventures and travails of Mrs. Green and her sisters.
Because of the potential implications of self-disclosure that can be difficult
for even the most experienced, beginning therapists are well-advised to use extreme caution. Although stiff attempts to maintain a shroud of secrecy around
one’s personal life are a misguided effort (Barnett, 1998), venting or proffering
too much information can impair rather than facilitate the therapy relationship.
Recognize and Control Judgmental Tendencies
An objective perspective is a crucial component of relationship building in therapy. We maintain this for both ethical and technical reasons. First, patients have a
right to expect the therapist to be a compassionate listener who will address their
concerns in a responsible and nonbiased manner. The professional role of therapist implies reserving personal judgment and focusing on the patient’s needs. Second, the patient will typically be more open and less resistant if the therapist
models the ability to weigh the problem without judging the person. The therapist’s emotional reactions to the problem can be viewed as a cue for how others in
the patient’s world might react, and perhaps how the patient feels about him- or
herself. For the sake of the relationship, the therapist exercises reserve and caution in sharing those feelings, and is alert to his or her own personal biases.
A therapist would not say to the patient, “Wow, you are extremely irritating to me. You seem to be an incredibly self-centered person.” Instead, the
therapist would use an emotional response as a guide for clinical exploration,
in the interest of therapeutic contemplation of the problem. So the therapist
might ask, “Do your friends or family ever seem to be exasperated or shorttempered with you? Let’s talk about some of the possible triggers for that.”
Developing a Treatment Plan 275
In situations where the patient “pushes the therapist’s buttons,” the therapist’s personal emotional reactions threaten to distort the clinical relationship.
From an objective perspective, the patient is not doing anything that others
would find particularly irritating. Rather, it is the therapist’s sensitivity and
judgment of the patient or the patient’s problem that is triggering the feelings of
irritation, perhaps because of a personal bias or a stereotype. A therapist who
has difficulty managing judgmental tendencies has a range of options, including supervision, consultation, or transfer of the patient. Ask yourself which
types of patients or problems might challenge your own emotional and judgmental reserve? How could you address these challenges?
Elicit Input and Feedback
A contemporary collaboration includes an active exchange of information and
shared decision making. Although the therapist is responsible for structuring
both individual sessions and the therapy as a whole, this objective can only be
achieved with active input and feedback from the patient. Patients are empowered to select problems and priorities and to set the pace of change. Patient feedback is directly solicited so that the provider can discern the most personally
meaningful elements of the intervention. This important process of negotiation
between patient and therapist (Safran & Muran, 2000) is more than superficial
consensus; it is both a necessary condition and an intrinsic part of a change process. In this atmosphere of ongoing negotiation, it is more likely that misunderstandings or negative reactions can be pinpointed early and resolved, rather than
allowed to fester and possibly derail a potentially productive venture.
Sensitivity to the patient’s personal need for structure is particularly important to successful collaboration. A single type of session structure does not
fit all individuals and personalities. Some patients respond well to highly active
therapists who ensure that each session has a discrete beginning, middle, and
end. Others find it more productive when the session follows a more conversational flow that pinpoints key issues. Some patients are comfortable in setting
their own agenda; others need more socialization to their options within therapy. When the need for structure is a component of a broader clinical issue, as
in the case of someone with a dependent personality, the behavioral aspects of
structuring the session can be broken down systematically and approached as
important skills to be developed.
Problems in Collaboration
Some therapy relationships are relatively uncomplicated as patient and therapist take readily to their respective roles and a productive working alliance follows. Both parties have functional expectations that need little if any explicit
discussion. With other patients, more specific effort is needed because there are
particular problems in therapeutic collaboration. Passive noncollaboration and
avoidance are two types of problematic collaboration. Passive noncollaboration
may be distinguished from active avoidance by the underlying antecedents or
triggers for the response (Davis & Hollon, 1999). Passive noncollaboration may
stem from low expectations for success, but active avoidance suggests negative,
personalized meanings such as distrust of therapy or externalized blame.
276 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
There are many possible reasons for noncollaborative responses, although
very few will actually reflect an internal motivation toward illness. These reasons can appear in any combination, and may vary according to changes in the
patient’s life circumstance as well as progress in therapy and response to the
therapist’s skill. Among the causes of patient noncollaboration are beliefs that
interfere with a good working relationship, such as the following commonly
encountered ideas:
• Being in therapy means I am a weak person.
• I don’t really trust therapists; my therapist has to prove he or she cares and
is an expert.
• If I make the changes the therapist suggests, I will become a selfish, uncaring person.
• If I make the changes the therapist suggests, I will be letting others down.
• If I make the changes the therapist suggests, I will be forced to do things I
cannot do.
• My therapist needs to know everything about me before I can change.
• My therapist should be able to know what is bothering me.
• My therapist should be able to fix me; feeling better should just happen.
• My therapist should force me to do things to make me better.
• I want to be my therapist’s favorite patient.
There are several ways that the therapist might assess the salience or influence of any or all these beliefs. One is to raise a discussion about the patient’s expectations and experience of therapy progress. Sometimes the patient will directly
disclose the belief, or express a feeling that with some gentle probing will allow
access to the belief. The following dialogue illustrates how this might occur:
T: How do you feel about your progress so far in overcoming your anxiety and
doing things that are difficult for you to do?
P: Frustrated. I want to be a lot further along.
T: What do you think has gotten in your way, or held you back?
P: Nothing really, but I think I need someone to force me to do what is difficult. I’m not very good at disciplining myself, and I need a demanding
taskmaster to make me do what I don’t want to do.
Obviously, further discussion of this belief and its implications, including the
long-term effects of depending on someone else for self-discipline, and possibly
experimenting with graded tasks will be an important part of the overall therapy, and therapy collaboration.
Another avenue for detecting therapy-interfering beliefs is in reviewing
homework assignments, especially the perceived benefit and perceived difficulty of doing the homework:
T: I’d like to hear about your homework, which if I remember correctly,
was to schedule an hour for doing something just for yourself that
Developing a Treatment Plan 277
you might enjoy. We discussed some ideas, as I recall. Were you able to
try out any of the things we considered, or did you try something completely different?
P: Well, I thought about the assignment a lot, but didn’t actually do anything.
T: That sounds like some important cognitive work. Can we talk further about
that?
P: Okay, but I don’t know what there is to talk about. I didn’t do anything.
T: That’s okay; what is important is to understand your thought process. Can
you tell me about your internal conversation about this idea? Was there
sort of a back-and-forth deliberation?
P: Yeah, there was. I really sort of wanted to do something just for me. The idea
sounded good, like something I never do. I even called and scheduled an
appointment at a nail salon to get a pedicure and was looking forward to a
nice treat. There is a coffee shop next to the salon, and I was going to get
one of those delicious caramel frappachinos and just relax and enjoy being
pampered for a little bit. But then I realized that I would be taking time
away from my family and spending money on myself, and I just didn’t feel
right about it. I guess I felt that taking time for me was going to turn me
into one of those selfish, uncaring, “high maintenance” types and I just
couldn’t do it. If I took that time for myself, I felt like I would be letting my
family down. So I spent the afternoon ironing clothes instead.
When the belief is revealed in the process of discussion, there is an immediate opportunity for further exploration and possible modification. Working
with the patient’s beliefs that her behavioral change will produce selfishness,
uncaring behavior, and negligence of responsibility to others is a prerequisite to
any sustained shift in her behavior. If the therapist had simply focused on trying
to prompt the behavior of scheduling pleasant activities and not explored the
therapy-interfering beliefs, some strain and tension probably would have been
introduced into the working alliance, and progress could stall or deteriorate.
Another useful way to detect therapy-interfering beliefs is by noting and
gently exploring behavior or affect within the context of therapy interaction.
When the patient shows an affective shift during a session, it is often useful not
only to inquire “what went through your mind just then,” but also to inquire,
“is there anything about what I have been doing or saying that might provoke
that feeling?” For example:
T: I noticed you winced just then, and seemed a bit agitated. Was there something that crossed your mind just then?
P: Actually, I was feeling irritated.
T: Was the irritation related to the topic we are discussing, or possibly something in my manner?
P: Well, I don’t like answering questions. I feel uncomfortable trying to put
my feelings into words. I wish you would just already know what is
bothering me.
Yet another way to consider possible interfering beliefs is to make an observation and present the belief as a hypothesis. If the patient talks a great deal
and has a difficult time setting an agenda, and seems to work hard to “get
everything out” by filling the therapist in on all the details of their life, the therapist might offer the following capsule summary.
T: I really appreciate your effort to be thorough in telling me how you are doing.
I want to ensure that we stay productively focused, but it’s a little hard to do
that and take everything in. I’d like to check out a possibility with you that
might help us be more efficient. Do you think that it is necessary for me to
know everything that has happened to fully understand and help you? Is
that maybe one reason why you work so hard to tell me everything?
P: Well, yes. I don’t really know what is important. So I need to get all the information to you so that you can figure out how to solve my problems.
T: So your assumption is that I need to know everything so that I can figure
out the solution to your problems.
P: Yes.
T: Is that strategy working very well so far?
P: Not really. I’m working really hard and I haven’t really gotten to hear what
you think I should do yet.
T: How about if we consider some different ideas about how to make our work
more productive?
This strategy of summarizing data from the patient in terms of observed
behaviors and reactions, and proposing an inferred belief can be a rapid way to
address collaborative problems. This method may be especially useful with beliefs that are difficult to elicit through a series of Socratic questions. However,
it may be wise to use this tool judiciously, as it can come across as heavyhanded, or may imply that the therapist knows what patients are thinking, and
in a sense, can “read their mind.”
Five Indications of a Good Working Relationship
How do you know if you have a good working relationship with your patient?
The provider’s personal perspective on this might suffer a self-serving bias.
We have a good working relationship, we think, because we intend to have a
good working relationship. Our patients might deem the working relationship
good for the very same reason. Virtuous intentions aside, what does a good
working relationship look like? Extensive and detailed empirical study of this
issue (see Horvath & Greenberg, 1994; Safran & Muran, 2000) has consistently identified a good working relationship as one that is characterized by
friendliness and a moderate, reciprocal degree of interpersonal control between patient and therapist.
Because the therapeutic relationship is an ongoing process, it is useful to
consider ways to self-monitor the current state of this working relationship. In
addition to assessment of the patient’s clinical progress (reduction in anxious
symptoms, progress toward specific goals), we can assess the following five indicators of overall friendliness and a balance of control:
1. There is a desire to have contact. A simple indication of the positive quality of
the working relationship is the overall motivation to have contact with this
278 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
specific person. Even if progress is difficult, those in a friendly relationship
will want to meet, as the contact is perceived as pleasant and therefore interpersonally reinforcing. Understandably, the patient’s ambivalence about
contact, observed perhaps by lateness, cancellations, long lags between
meetings, general lack of anticipation of the meeting, or even anxious apprehension may be a function of hopelessness or low self-esteem.
The friendliness of the interaction may be just the single thin thread
that helps motivate the patient to reconnect even through these difficulties. If the therapist has difficulties in finding the motivation for contact
with a patient, perhaps observed by avoiding phone calls, negative anticipation of the scheduled meeting, a wish for the patient to cancel, or desire
for transfer or termination, this also indicates a threat to the quality of the
relationship. Conceptualization of the pertinent triggers for the contact
avoidance is needed, as well as possible consultation or supervision.
2. Information is shared. A good working relationship is a confiding experience,
where the patient discloses personal thoughts and feelings. The patient has
things to talk about, and is able to discuss emotionally laden topics, hopefully
in depth. It is usually a good sign when the patient says “I’ve never told anyone that before,” or “Only very few people know about this.” In a productive
relationship, the patient might also discover new thoughts and formulations
during the process of confiding in you. The patient may spontaneously remark, “I’ve never thought about this in quite this way until I started talking
about it out loud to you.” When there is a dearth of information, either
clients have successfully resolved their problems and no longer have pressing
concerns, or specific beliefs may be inhibiting the collaboration.
3. Positive affect is expressed. A backdrop of friendliness in the relationship can
be noted by each individual expressing some positive affect, ideally as a
result of the interpersonal exchange. Usually this occurs in a spontaneous
fashion, perhaps as a shared smile or laugh in the course of the therapy
dialogue, or by a sigh of relief and a release of physical tension.
Although humor is typically used judiciously in therapy, the skillful
accomplishment of a positive affective exchange marks a good working relationship. Deeply depressed patients may express only a fleeting smile,
but report an increase in their sense of hope. Anxious patients may relax a
bit, and report feeling more encouraged. The expression of positive affect
can also include some forms of physical contact that fall within professional and clinically appropriate limits. The therapist might offer a handshake or the patient might reach out for a hug. Positive affect that crosses
physical boundaries of intimacy is never appropriate, however. The patient
and therapist do not kiss or hold one another in intimate positions or engage in any questionable physical contact to express positive feelings.
4. Sense of teamwork. Closely related to the expression of positive affect and
the desire for contact is a mutual perception that the patient and therapist
are working effectively as a team. This perception can be checked on a
regular basis by directly asking the patient. The therapist can monitor the
degree of control exhibited during the session and strive for balance and
reciprocity. Therapists must avoid responding to passive behavior in patients by taking over too much control. Allowing the patient to dominate
Developing a Treatment Plan 279
the session with unproductive ruminations, complaints, tangential storytelling or analysis of the problems of other people is just as unproductive.
When there is teamwork, all the participants will feel as though they are
getting somewhere, even if the progress is slow.
5. Negative sentiment is productive. As Safran and Muran (2000) note, there is
general consensus for the notion that strains in the therapeutic relationship are inevitable. The ability to deal therapeutically with negative process is among the most important aspects of a good working relationship.
Do both parties believe that they can confront and effectively use negative feelings or disagreements? If the patient is confused or upset by something the therapist says or suggests, does he or she feel able to speak up? Can
the patient ask questions? Does the therapist detect possible negative reactions in the session and check them out? Does the therapist pick up on disagreement from the patient or is it deflected and ignored? Can the therapist
take criticism without becoming defensive? Does the therapist explore other
possible indicators of negative process as a source of useful information such
as discussing the patient’s ambivalence about continuing in therapy?
In a good working relationship, useful results are drawn from negative
events. We are concerned about the working relationship where everything is
“perfect,” but not much affect, either positive or negative, is being exchanged.
We are most concerned about the working relationship marked by tension and
negative exchange only, with little resolution or sense of productivity attached
to the contact.
Summary
Over a relatively long period of training and development, therapists acquire the
core collaboration skills needed to fulfill the role of being a professional therapist. They also learn specific skills for structuring and directing therapy with
comprehensive treatment plans. Developing and implementing a treatment plan
is as much a matter of caring and confidently engaging the patient in a coherent
approach to problem solving as it is selecting effective techniques and strategies.
Some techniques for effectively engaging patients include focusing attention, resisting distractions, recalling personal information, reserving judgment, and calibrating the structure based on individual responses and feedback.
In addition to collaboration and relationship skills, specific techniques for
structuring treatment are needed to create a sufficient support for the patient’s efforts to change. Chief complaints need to be translated into measurable goals, and
an agreement as to the direction and tasks of therapy needs to be negotiated. It is
useful to keep in mind a plan for self-monitoring the quality of the collaboration,
and not to rely on good intentions as the only measure. Important indicators of a
good working relationship include a motivation to have contact, sharing of emotional information, expression of positive affect, a sense of teamwork, and the
ability to draw productive conclusions from negative sentiments. For all parties
with a stake in the usefulness of therapy, success lies not only in the sophistication
of the treatment plan, but also in a skillfully tended therapeutic relationship.
280 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
281
11
Chapter
Therapeutic Methods: Building
Psychotherapy Skills
Psychotherapy is a complex endeavor that requires extensive knowledge
and skill. To become competent as a psychotherapist, you must build a
strong repertoire of conceptual skills, relationship skills, and procedural skills.
Having addressed conceptual and relationship skills in the previous two chapters, we now turn to specific procedures used in psychotherapy.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Discuss the importance of having a range of procedural skills.
• Describe eight interpersonal and systems interventions.
• Describe eight affective interventions.
• Describe eight behavioral interventions.
• Describe eight cognitive interventions.
If you ask 10 laypersons what specific things a psychotherapist does, you
might be very surprised by what you hear. Try this, and see what you discover.
To some, there are few obvious differences between the actions of therapists
and the actions of good friends. Therapists listen, care, and offer supportive
comments as you need them. Others think of therapist actions as similar to a
scolding parent, complete with a wagging index finger, cajoling tone, and unfaltering advice. Still others magnify the therapist’s intellectual powers and infuse the clinical action with a mystical or psychic quality. The therapist absorbs
282 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
every detail and applies an elaborate understanding of deep motivations. Yet
another view expects the therapist to assist in emotional catharsis and the release of pent-up feelings. Such therapists would elicit intense affect, and assist
clients in expressive actions such as weeping, shouting, or thumping pillows.
Finally, and perhaps most popular, is the vision of the therapist as being gifted
with perfectly calm insight, quickly ascertaining the sources of emotional distress, and dispensing concrete, direct, and effective solutions. This therapist,
like the scolding parent, seems to have all the answers and can tell you how to
fix yourself in a few simple steps, without the authoritarian tone. In reality, all
these impressions are based on some kernel of truth about the specific interventions that therapists use.
Each of these descriptions is based on a different snapshot of the relevant
content of therapy, and the associated procedures or methods. Therapists have
traditionally identified themselves in one or another of these snapshots on the
basis of their chosen school or system of approach to psychotherapy. Clientcentered therapists are warm facilitators; psychodynamic therapists are intrapsychic interpreters; humanistic therapists are guides for personal discovery
and expression; and cognitive-behavioral therapists are coping skill dispensers.
Decades of accumulated research on the effectiveness of different systems
of psychotherapy have gradually induced a paradigm shift toward understanding the foundations of psychotherapy as a flexible set of procedures applied in
the context of a clinical relationship. Whether clinicians conceptualize psychotherapy as a set of empirically supported treatments designed to ameliorate specific clinical syndromes (e.g., Chambless & Hollon, 1998) or as empirically
supported relationships that are designed to meet the needs of specific persons
(e.g., Norcross, 2002; Wampold, 2001), adherence to a single school of therapy
and one-size-fits-all methods is increasingly outdated. As Norcross notes, “The
research shows an effective psychotherapist is one who employs specific methods, who offers strong relationships, and who customizes both discrete methods and relationship stances to the individual person and condition.”(2002,
p. 13). In essence, we are moving away from an “allegiance” model of practice
where the psychologist makes a categorical decision to adopt a single theoretical orientation and toward a broader scientific model where the psychologist integrates empirical information into a biopsychosocial model of human
behavior. The core units of competence with the biopsychosocial model are the
ability to think critically and to approach clinical phenomena in a systematic
and unbiased manner.
Applying Specific Procedures
As you read about specific procedures, keep in mind that the success of any intervention depends in part on the context in which it is applied. In practice,
both instrumental and interpersonal dimensions are part of the same context,
and have a reciprocal interaction (Safran & Muran, 2000). The usefulness and
potency, for good or ill, of any procedure is highly affected by when and how
the therapist applies it, for what purpose, and how the patient feels about it.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 283
The procedure may be well tested and useful in a general sense, but not workable in a given clinical situation for any number of reasons. The explanation of
the procedure may be insufficient, it may not suit the learning style of the particular patient, it may be awkward or uncomfortable to either party, or it may
be peripheral to the patient’s current problems, just to name a few possibilities.
Thus, you may find that these potentially effective procedures do not always
work in the straightforward way that our examples suggest.
Effectively using a broad range of procedures requires conceptual and
technical skill, timing, and interpersonal rapport. Stuffing a large number of
techniques into a given client’s therapy will not necessarily lead to better outcome. Overreliance on techniques or over-using a few techniques can make
therapy shallow and gimmicky. Forcing a particular procedure on a reluctant
client is perhaps the riskiest venture because the therapist might be confusing
the procedure with conceptualization, thinking that the essence of therapy is
defined by some prototypic action. The therapist may be caught in a “should”
and “must” trap about techniques of therapy. For example, the therapist might
think that every cognitive therapy session must include an automatic thought
record. There are many risks in this sort of rigidity, including the risk of alienating the client from the opportunity of therapy.
Readers should keep in mind both the interpersonal and clinical context
for any procedure. The following sections describe some of the basic tools with
which the provider can craft a more comprehensive intervention. These are not
intended to be exhaustive summaries, but rather a foundation of procedures for
building basic practice. For the sake of discussion, these procedures are divided
into interpersonal and systems, affective, behavioral, and cognitive categories,
reflecting the primary mode of the intervention. Each category includes descriptions of eight useful intervention procedures. In practice, these interventions are often combined and applied in the context of a collaborative
relationship. Other relevant factors including the principles, stages, and levels
of change are also part of the conceptualization that guides selection of procedures such as those described here.
Interpersonal and Systems Interventions
Interpersonal and systems interventions are geared toward functional
changes in patterns of communication and processes of social and group interactions. Depending on how the client presents for therapy, interventions of
this type may be appropriate early, in the middle, later, or instead of individually focused work. Clients with a chaotic, neglectful, controlling, or otherwise unstable family history may especially need to address the interpersonal
components of their problems. Interpersonal interventions develop skills and
interactions needed for effective functioning within relationships and groups.
For a given client, there may be internal barriers to more effective functioning
such as faulty beliefs or pent-up feelings that need to be addressed with affective and cognitive interventions either before or concomitant with interpersonal changes.
284 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Family and Cultural History
Family processes play a pivotal role in the psychosocial development of individual members. This is especially true for the impact of a family of origin on its
children, as some degree of connection to these family processes is present
throughout an individual’s life span. Family patterns are also embedded within
a cultural context of values, beliefs, and affiliations that shape the norms
within a family for acceptable behavior and expected family functioning (Teyber, 2006).
All approaches to therapy include at least an overview of family and cultural experiences that affected an individual’s child and adolescent development. Most core beliefs and associated behaviors have their origins in these
early experiences. The task of reviewing a family history can take an oral narrative form in therapy sessions or it can be written as a homework assignment
and discussed in the sessions. Yet another option is to illustrate a complete,
cross-generational family history with a formal genogram (McGoldrick, Gerson, & Shellenberger, 1999). The objective in such explorations is to better understand the client’s behavioral and emotional learning history. Hypotheses
can be drawn about the beliefs and conclusions the client formulated concerning the self and other people on the basis of these experiences with significant
others.
Interactions with family may have shaped the personal beliefs “I am
unimportant,” and “other people will reject my needs.” When activated, these
beliefs will likely show up in current interactions discussed in therapy, and in
relating to the therapist. Connecting beliefs to the family history spotlights the
implicit, inflexible and durable nature of these ideas as the basis for a pattern of
relating to the self and the world.
When these beliefs arise during the therapy interaction (e.g., if the client
is overly apologetic about rescheduling an appointment), the therapist can spot
the activation of the core belief and help the client recognize the pattern and
learn to discriminate the past from the present. In addition, the healing process
includes helping the client to realistically understand family events and coalitions and to come to terms with both the good news and the bad news in their
families (Teyber, 2006). Important areas to explore include family economic
and health history, major events, cultural affiliations, affective and behavioral
rules, and the impact of any family secrets.
Case Example
Donna came to therapy because of acute
anxiety problems. Her mother had died
suddenly a few years ago, and ever since
then, Donna has suffered recurrent
panic attacks and depression. Her childhood had been economically, socially,
and geographically unstable, with her
mother as the source of reassurance
during tough times. Her father was a
minister who moved from church to
church, eventually alienating each successive congregation with his stern,
judgmental, and self-centered attitudes.
He made favorable first impressions
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 285
Trace an Interpersonal Developmental Time Line
An overview of the client’s personal developmental time line in terms of interpersonal skills, challenges and resources can refine global self-perceptions and
activate a hopeful perspective. Being in a state of distress often produces memory distortions such that current difficulties are recalled as being continuously
present, and are then projected to either stay just as bad or worsen indefinitely
into the future. The client says, “It’s always been this bad, I’ve been a misfit my
whole life. If I am not any better with my relationships now, how am I ever
going to face the challenges of my future? I’ll certainly fail and be alone forever.” If encouraged to test the accuracy of this thought directly, the client is
most likely to defend the perception as true.
Another way to test the accuracy of this generalization is to go back in time.
For many clients, it may be useful to begin the time line in childhood, perhaps
Case Example (Continued)
with his impassioned approach to religious leadership, but inevitably he
would cross the wrong person and have
to move on to another locale. He was
emotionally distant and punitive with
his children, and he expected most of all
that they should make him look good in
public. The children were strongly admonished not to discuss their father’s
methods of corporal punishment outside
their home, and they were not allowed
to talk back to him. Donna learned “I
must seek the approval of others,” and
“other people are threats to my safety.”
At her mother’s funeral, Donna had
the opportunity to have contact with
her mother’s family, with whom they
had very little communication over the
years. She even met several cousins and
their families for the first time and
found them to be warm and charming.
This did not fit at all with the negative
image of heathen, immoral alcoholabusers that had been offered by her
parents as the reason for the family distance. In talking with her maternal
aunt, Donna discovered the true reason
for their distance had been her own
mother’s shame over her father’s instability and abusive behavior toward the
children and her father’s controlling attitudes about family associations. There
was a history of alcoholism in her
mother’s family, which was the main
reason that her father had discouraged
and even forbidden their contact.
Donna was now redefining her family relationships, including her family
of origin and her extended family of
in-laws. She wanted to be more assertive and increase her contact with
her mother’s family and decrease her
contact with her father, and limit her
interactions with certain in-laws who
seemed to be highly status oriented,
but she found this triggered her global
fears of disapproval. In discussing her
choices with her therapist, it became
evident in their interaction that she
was also seeking the therapist’s endorsement as part of the interpersonal
pattern of her core belief about the
need for approval of her actions.
286 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
their preschool years, and inquire about interpersonal functioning in segments of
time proceeding through their development. The perspective gained by this exercise, in addition to a vast wealth of information about their life history, is often
one of ups and downs. At a broad level, the global conclusion that “I’ve always
been a misfit,” is disconfirmed by the historical review. Important information
about functional relationships can be used in planning current options and alternatives (see cognitive interventions).
Take a Current Interpersonal Inventory
People interact within interpersonal circles and social networks. Taking an i




ventory of current interpersonal relationships provides a systematic way to
focus on these relationships. Important dimensions of these relationships can
then be discussed, such as degree of intimacy, frequency of communication,
power and influence, and connections with specific group affiliations. An adequately populated and functioning social network is needed to satisfy individual emotional needs for companionship and enjoyment. Affiliations with
others also create a social reference group and a means of constructing and
maintaining a social identity. A current inventory can pinpoint gaps and possible deficits as well as areas of tension or conflict. This inventory can begin with
a list of important current relationships as well as more casual contacts or acquaintances, followed by an exploration of potential areas of discomfort, difficulty, and potential change.
Clinical Example
When Jan lamented that she had been
a “reject” her whole life, her therapist
remarked that this was indeed an exceptionally rare problem. Because success and failure are typically coexisting
processes that come and go in everyone’s life, it might be important to understand how Jan could have only
continuous failure. Usually the feelings
of success or failure wax and wane over
time as life tasks are alternately easier
or more difficult.
So to really get a sense of this in any
one particular life, it is useful to trace a
time line with notation of any recognizable successes or failures. They began, in
a systematic way, to trace Jan’s life experiences in segments of 5 years, beginning from birth to age five, when Jan
succeeded in many interpersonal tasks
(forming a place in her family, learning
basic verbal manners such as “please”
and “thank-you,” attended mother’s day
out), but perhaps failed in others (too
afraid of the other children to ride the
bus to school). The time line continued
in this way, traced out on successive
sheets of paper, bringing interpersonal
experiences and skills into the present
day. In the end, many forgotten or unacknowledged successes were brought to
light, and failures were put into perspective, so Jan’s overall conclusions
about her interpersonal skills and value
were less globally negative and failure
oriented.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 287
Explore Roles and Role Transitions
Most people will assume different social roles over the course of a lifetime.
From student to apprentice to friend, relative, coworker, adult, boss, teacher,
parent, spouse, neighbor, classmate, professional or many others, our social
roles have a fundamental impact on our psychological sense of self and worth.
Some of our roles are deeply invested with meaning whereas others may be
considered peripheral or relatively unimportant. Being a parent may be central
for some while roles held for employment are simply jobs that are necessary to
pay the bills. For others, career roles have high priority, but family roles are incidental. Most people strive for some balance of family and career roles as both
are important to their sense of self.
Difficulties with role adjustment are possible targets for therapeutic intervention when psychosocial roles are ambiguous, overloaded, or ill-fitted to the
skills or expectations of the individual. Many role difficulties will emerge during a time of transition, when any discrepancy between the skills and abilities
of the individual and the role demands becomes apparent. This may occur because the person does not fully understand the tasks and demands, does not
have the skills for fulfilling the demands or has become incapacitated by the increasing demands of multiple roles or significantly more complex roles. Discussion of the specific expectations and requirements of the role and the process of
change can help mobilize a more effective coping perspective. When needed,
Clinical Example
Ray was depressed and lonely. He was
estranged from his extended family, his
father was deceased, his mother was in
a nursing home due to severe and progressive dementia, and his only sibling
lived in a distant state and was disabled
by years of alcohol and drug abuse. He
and his wife were separated but not divorced due to religious reasons, and
they rarely spoke. His work as a consultant required regular travel throughout
the country for short-term assignments,
and as a result, he had no work colleagues to speak of. His office was in his
home, where he lived alone. Because of
his work travel, he kept no pets. He no
longer attended church and he belonged
to no groups or associations.
Ray’s interpersonal network had
such a deficit in the number of people
that he was basically interpersonally
impoverished. His social skills for casual interactions were strong, as he had
no problem traveling about and interacting with new people in different
work settings all the time. However, his
skills in making and establishing more
intimate friendships and relationships
that would continue past a fleeting
contact were much more limited. In addition, conflicts and tensions from his
family of origin affected not only the
number of people participating in his
life, but his willingness to risk trust and
intimacy with others.
288 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
specific skill development may help with role adjustment. For example, retirement planning classes may help with the shift from full-time professional to
part-time volunteer.
Provide Instruction in Assertive Communication Skills
This intervention involves assisting clients in recognizing and choosing to express their thoughts and feelings in a manner that is conducive to effective social interactions. The focus of the intervention is the behavioral expression of
clients’ underlying feelings in ways that show respect for both self and others.
This intervention has several components. First, the client learns to recognize signs of unassertiveness, such as being too passive and feeling victimized
or disappointed, or signs of being too aggressive, demanding, or inattentive to
Clinical Example
Mark came to therapy at the insistence
of his wife, Renee, who was at her wit’s
end with role overload. She was working full time, taking care of their infant
daughter, and helping Mark’s mother
deal with breast cancer and a failing
business. Mark had completed a college
degree in music education and a master’s degree in educational administration, but he had yet to apply for any
jobs. Instead, he spent his days at home,
smoking pot and playing video games.
Renee took the baby to day-care,
worked all day at an administrative job
she disliked, picked up the baby, and returned home, only to be greeted by
Mark, sitting on the sofa surrounded by
mess, asking “what do you want to do
about dinner?” Mark would then go to
the supermarket, if Renee gave him a
list, although he might get sidetracked
by stopping off to visit with friends
along the way. Mark was comfortable
in his role of extended adolescence, but
was on the verge of failure in fulfilling
the new roles of spouse and father. Part
of Mark’s difficulty was role ambiguity.
He had not given much thought to the
actual changes that were taking place
in his life and thus did not become oriented toward the new roles. He was
still in his mid-20s and he viewed adult
responsibilities as something for his
30s. This was still the time for having
fun, and as long as Renee was working
and they could pay their bills, he did
not see the need to make any changes.
Sometimes role transitions can be
eased by obtaining practical help from
other people, at least until the skills
needed for the new role can be fully developed. Some roles are demanding precisely because there added or more
complex responsibilities. Sometimes delegation to others is unavoidable. The
client may not have attempted to obtain
help because of the effort or expense, because of being unfamiliar or uncomfortable with doing so, or because assistance
was not readily available. Many people
either are in a practical situation where
they do not have ready access to people
as resources, or are in a psychological situation where they avoid this option.
There may be internal cognitive or emotional barriers to this process (e.g., “I
should be able to handle all this myself; I
am failing if I do not.”). However, at a
fundamental practical level, it is important to ask whether the role strain could
be eased by obtaining assistance.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 289
the rights of others. Second, the client practices consideration of the possible
choices for expressing thoughts and feelings in the context of specific situations. Therapists can discuss with the client different ways to assert feelings,
such as refusing an offer, expressing an opinion, or making a request, and practice some actual words or statements to use.
These actions need to be placed in an overall context for effectiveness in a
social situation. For example, refusing an offer from a nervous second-grader
who is trying to sell gift wrap for her school is very different from refusing a
sales pitch from a professional salesperson offering timeshare vacation condominiums. The benefits of assertive communication will likely be greatest when
sufficient consideration of mutual respect (respecting both the rights of self and
the rights of others) and social context is given. Thus, this technique involves
developing skills in recognizing one’s feelings, sizing up the situation, and
choosing a response, as well as finding some effective words and using them in
a respectful way. The essence of assertiveness may rest in the recognition of the
choices available in social situations, and the specific exercise of a choice.
Routines and Rituals
Routines and rituals help to stabilize individual and group systems by ensuring
that crucial tasks are completed. Informal routines of daily habits provide a
structure that gives continuity and a sense of security to ambiguous and repetitive situations.
Encourage the client’s use of routine to stabilize behavior or improve the
efficiency of important tasks. Having a particular sequence of behavior at bedtime can help ensure a restful night of sleep. Getting back to the routines of
Clinical Example
Thirteen-year-old Ian was embarrassed
and angry with his math teacher for habitually mispronouncing his name with
a long vowel sound like “eye,” and teasingly referring to him as the “eye-man.”
Thus far, Ian had said nothing to the
teacher, but he had gotten a detention
for talking in his class and not paying
attention. Ian and his therapist noted
that he was feeling distressed and angry, but his behavior was passive and
indirect, possible signs of unassertiveness. His therapist pointed out that although it might not be easy, Ian did
have the option of sharing his feelings
more directly with the teacher, and
making a request. They considered the
best time to initiate this communication and practiced the specific actions
with a role-play. Ian decided to stay after school and approach his teacher
when there was less likelihood of anyone else being around. He practiced acknowledging possible thoughts and
feelings of the teacher, acknowledging
his own feelings, and making a request.
His intended communication was to
sound something like this: “Mr. Green,
I know you like to make things funny
in class, but I get embarrassed being
called eye-man. I would like it better if
you would use the pronunciation of my
name that my parents use, which is eean. Thanks.”
290 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
everyday living with designated times for regular tasks can be stabilizing in the
wake of a traumatic event, or in recovering from a significant loss. From reading the newspaper every morning to exercise on Monday-Wednesday-Friday to
grocery shopping and laundry on Saturday to eating waffles on Sunday, the
regular routine provides consistency and direction. Key to an effectively functioning system, is the ability to adjust routines as needed to meet temporary demands for flexibility.
Formal rituals also serve important emotional functions. Cultural rituals
such as weddings, funerals, graduations, and holiday gatherings create a sanctioned way to acknowledge membership within the group. Participating in such
rituals gives the individual an impetus to focus on the emotional component of
the relationships, to express emotions in a social context, to acknowledge both
change and continuity in relationships and groups and to attach meaning to
specific social commitment.
Attending a funeral of someone who has died usually helps us process our
own feelings of grief, loss, and separation by sharing those feelings with other
loved ones, recognizing the social changes precipitated by the death, and gaining perspective on the importance of friends, family members, or even fond acquaintances. Other more joyful rituals help us and those around us recognize
our movement through life (e.g., graduations, weddings, christenings, birthday
parties) and attach certain emotions and meaning to that movement. The obvious exception to this strategy is the problem of obsessive-compulsive behavior
that involves excessive and senseless rituals that interfere with normal living.
Family and Collateral Meetings
Consultation with family members or significant others can be useful in many
therapeutic contexts. Sometimes the family unit is the focus of treatment and
all sessions involve some combination of family members. Usually one person
is the identified patient and any others present are identified as “collateral” participants. Family consultations are usually actively structured and directed by
the therapist in pursuit of specific goals. Typical goals for collateral consultaClinical Example
Molly felt enduring guilt about having
had an affair with a married man when
she was in college, even after extensive
work with cognitive reframing. Although it had been a long while since she
had participated in religious services, she
was receptive to the idea of attending
services designed for atonement. She decided to attend services with an attitude
of simply participating in the ritual and
being open to whatever might occur. In
reporting back to her therapist, she described a wonderful and liberating experience that crystallized when she read a
particular scriptural passage that she had
not fully noticed in the past. The passage
instructed the reader to turn away from
sin and to live; in reading this, she saw
the intended message as letting go of her
guilt and moving forward with her life.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 291
tions include one or more of the following: gathering information, sharing information among participants, providing psychoeducation, identifying primary
concerns, expressing feelings, improving communication patterns and skills,
communicating about progress and change, facilitating stress management,
conflict resolution or problem solving, and evaluating and stabilizing roles and
emotional involvement.
Balance Autonomy and Relationship/Group Affiliation
Our culture is very heterogeneous with respect to an emphasis on individual
pursuits over social and familial commitments (see Chapter 3). We tend to endorse the freedom to pursue one’s true inner self, yet we still define one another and ourselves through various relationships and memberships. This
freedom can bring confusion or tension regarding a functional balance between personal fulfillment and social connection. Clients may come to therapy
as a result of the stress of such conflicts and need help reconciling their beliefs,
overcoming barriers that stand in the way of their choices, and recognizing behavioral options for personal and interpersonal involvements.
Signs of this imbalance might include feeling controlled by a relationship
or group membership, feeling stretched too thin and having no personal time at
all, not being able to say no to demands or expectations out of a fear of the social consequences, feeling compelled to do things that are personally harmful
or inconsistent with one’s values, becoming alienated from one’s priorities and
personal goals, or feeling alone and disconnected from any sense of belonging
to a community or dissatisfied and searching for something missing. The focus
of this intervention is to help the client see available choices for both making
and limiting interpersonal involvements with the goal of striking a personal
Clinical Example
Eloise’s severe arthritis at age 75 had
advanced to where she required a fulltime caregiver in her home. She was
delighted to have Robin with her each
day to help with dressing, bathing, eating, light correspondence, and outings
such as trips to the doctor and hairstylist. Each night, either Eloise’s husband
or his sister stayed with her in case she
needed any assistance during the night.
Eloise had been in intermittent
therapy for approximately 25 years for
recurrent depression and severe obsessive anxiety. Recently, she was devastated to find out that her husband had
a long-standing intimate relationship
with a younger woman that he was
unwilling to end. When Eloise returned for individual therapy, her therapist included some collateral visits
with Robin and Eloise as part of the
treatment plan. Robin provided information on Eloise’s mood, revealing
clear shifts related to the husband’s
comings and goings, particularly if he
was gone all night. Eloise was able to
express her appreciation to Robin for
her emotional support, and the therapist was able to provide Robin with
guidance and encouragement on managing the emotional and interpersonal
challenges of this situation.
292 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
balance that is healthy and functional. Using or developing assertive communication skills may be a part of implementing the choices in this intervention.
The behavioral implications of the client’s choices are to increase, decrease, or redirect selected interpersonal contacts. A client who does not want
to date a drinker would do well to steer clear of bars, nightclubs, and drinking
parties, and seek friendships through nondrinking venues. If a client thinks he
would enjoy more intellectual stimulation from others, enrolling in a class
might make this accessible. If a client would like to meet others with similar
political interests, it might be useful to volunteer for a political campaign.
Affective Interventions
Affective interventions are focused primarily on the experience of emotions
and bodily sensations. Objectives of affective interventions are to increase conscious awareness of the emotional components of an experience or situation, to
reduce avoidance of an affective reaction, to increase the client’s tolerance of
emotional experience, and to assist in the functional use of emotion. The overall goal is to shape the recognition of a range of affective states as a source of
vital information in adaptive living.
Intensity and authenticity are elements of the client’s subjective emotional experience that represent individual differences, and should be respected
Clinical Example
Ryan enjoyed his sales manager position, but the job required a great deal
of entertaining and socializing on the
nights and weekends. These work
events always included alcohol and
there was much heavy drinking by the
sales staff and the customers. Now that
he was married and had a young child,
Ryan wanted to spend more of his
evenings and weekends with his family.
He also wanted to pursue his hobby of
cycling for sport and fitness, but this
was an interest that few of his customers or coworkers shared. He felt as
though he had more bases than he
could reasonably cover and began to
think that his life was not going in the
direction he most desired. The significant financial rewards of his sales job
made Ryan feel successful, and he felt
strong bonds with several of his
coworkers, including the regional manager who was his mentor and “like a father figure.” When he tried to reduce
his contact with the socializing and
drinking, Ryan received much direct
and indirect pressure from his colleagues to maintain the status quo.
Ryan eventually decided that it was in
his best interest to make a career
change altogether. He resigned from his
position, began attending AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) to stop drinking,
and enrolled in a master’s degree program to earn his teaching certificate.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 293
as such. The clinician wants to avoid any implication that there is a “right” or
“proper” type or degree of emotion for any given situation. The expression of
emotion (e.g., anger) may have functional and dysfunctional parameters that
can be addressed with other behavioral, cognitive, or systems interventions.
Mindfulness Practice
There are many strategies of mindfulness practice (see Hanh, 1987; Hayes,
Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999; Linehan, 1993; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002).
The common thread among these approaches is the focusing of awareness on
internal components of experience and increasing one’s skill in observing perceptions, sensations, and thoughts without attempting to change them. Mindfulness can be done in a quiet, eyes-closed state, or it can be practiced during
an activity such as walking, folding laundry, or eating. This practice often has a
calming effect, although that is not a direct objective. Regular mindfulness
practice is intended to decrease the fusion between problematic thoughts or
emotions and actions, and promote greater awareness of the different dimensions of experience as contents of the mind.
Clinical Example
Betty kept worrying about a family situation that was beyond her control. It was
getting to the point that she barely noticed what she was doing during the day
as her mind focused on the family circumstance. She was instructed in mindfulness practice as a way to help herself
live fully with her experience of worry
and concern. Each day, for 10 minutes,
she would sit in a quiet place and focus
her attention on feeling herself breathing, noticing any bodily sensations as
they occurred, without struggling with
those sensations or trying to get rid of
them. She practiced noticing the content
of her mind, without judging or evaluating it, or pursuing the content in any directed way. She would notice that
worries about her family were popping
into her mind, but she did not attempt
either to get rid of them, or to try to
search for possible solutions. She simply
refocused her attention on breathing
again and again, and would always conclude the exercise with attention to her
breathing.
Emotional Deepening and Validation
Helping clients identify, deepen, or extend their understanding of the emotion,
and accept rather than deny or reject the experience is a fundamental affective
technique. This begins with listening actively for indications of emotional content, and providing reflective feedback to the client. Bringing explicit attention
to the emotional domain, and helping to provide labels for the emotions gives
importance to this dimension of the client’s personal experience, and can help
articulate the experience (see L. S. Greenberg et al., 1993; Linehan, 1993).
294 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Beginning therapists are often prone to underestimate the importance of
this technique and become frustrated with “just listening and not doing anything.” To overcome this error, it is helpful to realize the potential benefit in
skillfully attending to emotional content, appropriately drawing this into the
discussion, encouraging the client to attend to the thoughts and sensations that
are aroused, and providing crucial social support in the form of validating the
understandable triggers of the emotional response.
Clients may have in the past or present encountered those who invalidate
their emotions (“You shouldn’t be depressed; cheer up!”), and they may have
acquired the habit of invalidating their own emotions. Effective listening and
validation by the therapist will often, but not always, help clients reduce their
level of distress, and begin to induce some positive affect as well as a greater receptiveness to problem-solving or suggestion.
Clinical Example
Kay was troubled by family interactions
with her parents. In the following dialogue, the therapist draws emotional
content explicitly into the discussion
and validates Kay’s experience.
Kay: It’s weird when my parents visit.
They’re really a big help with the
kids and all, but they’re so messy,
and they’re always giving me advice
about what my husband should be
doing better.
Therapist: So some conflicting feelings
come up when they visit. It sounds
like you feel happy and grateful for
their help with the kids, but uncomfortable with the unwanted help
with your husband, and the added
stress of more mess in your house.
Kay: (Nods) Uh huh. I don’t want to be
ungrateful, or take advantage of
them, and I do want them to visit,
and have a relationship with the
kids. Oh, I don’t know. I should just
count my blessings and stop griping.
Therapist: Well, we can certainly take
some time to talk about ways to deal
with these feelings that make you
want to gripe. But first, let’s take
time for you to understand those
feelings and have room to have them.
It makes sense to me that you would
feel pulled in two directions given
these circumstances, feeling both
grateful and annoyed at the same
time. Does that describe some of
your experience?
Kay: Yes. I think I’m mainly annoyed
with myself that I can’t just ignore
what they say about Bob and go on.
Therapist: Do you feel that tension inside yourself right now?
Kay: (tearing up) Yes. My throat and
stomach are tight. I just don’t know
how to respond to what they say, so I
just try to blow it off.
Therapist: Well, it seems logical that a
person would feel some tension and
distress when two feelings are conflicting like this, especially when
those feelings are related to such important relationships.
This dialogue would continue with
exploring the client’s feelings and eventually move toward problem solving,
encouraging the client to recognize how
she tends to invalidate and dismiss her
own feelings and modeling an alternative of acceptance via the therapeutic
interaction.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 295
Interoceptive Exposure
The experience of an affective state may trigger a reaction of fear and avoidance, perhaps because of beliefs related to the unacceptability of certain feelings or their outward expressions, or possible dangerousness of the internal
sensations. Avoiding these internal sensations can lead to broad and elaborate
networks of avoidance and safety behavior.
For lasting change to occur, it may be necessary to work directly on exposure to the actual sensations, to increase tolerance and decrease the sense of associated threat, and to detect any especially problematic thoughts connected to
the sensation. The particular internal sensations feared by the client will be
unique, but are typically associated with an uncomfortable or undesirable outcome, such as choking, collapsing, or dying. Interoceptive exposure involves
activating those sensations, typically in low to medium intensity, to allow for
deconstruction of the sensation in physical terms (e.g., just tension in the muscles) and greater tolerance for the physical experience as well as recognition of
its passing nature, thus decreasing the perceived threat and concomitant fear of
the sensation.
Willingness Exercises
Willingness interventions are exercises of the client’s choice to pursue a desired
activity with the understanding that certain undesired emotions may occur. The
exercise is one of being willing to have the emotion if it occurs, and still carry
on with the plan. So the client might choose to be willing to go to work, even
though depression or a sad mood might occur. Or the client might choose to
give a presentation, even though anxiety might be part of the experience. The
objective of these exercises is to pursue behaviors or activities that are important to the client and give meaning to their life, without trying to control all
emotional components of the experience. The client is practicing the willingness to have emotions.
Clinical Example
When Bob felt panicky, he was especially troubled by tension in his throat,
difficulty in swallowing, and a choking
sensation. These symptoms were explained as due to muscle tension activated by a fear response and not
indicative of any state of medical compromise. Bob had recently been evaluated medically and was deemed to be in
good health. With his therapist’s
prompting, Bob practiced bringing on
the sensations of tension in his throat
and chest. He was instructed to tighten
the muscles in his throat, and then to
stop a swallow half-way through and
hold it for 30 seconds. Then he tightened his chest and held his breath for
45 seconds. This was repeated several
times, each time discussing the degree
of distress Bob felt with the sensations,
noting that his distress went down with
repeated exposures.
296 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Values Assessment
Values exercises bring out the client’s emotional investment in various life activities. Values are pursuits or roles that have an importance for the client that
will typically endure across time and situations. Some values may be more
salient at different times in life, and thus matter more because of developmental demands. Being a good parent may take priority over other important values
when the client is raising young children. An unmarried, childless client may
highly value being a good parent, but other values such as career or friendships
have more immediate salience. We can help clients detect the strength of their
attachment to various values, and connect this to the direction of their energy.
Clinical Example
Shirley prepared a special healthy
snack for her daughter’s first-grade
class and then felt humiliated when the
children did not like it. She was so upset by this personal failure that she was
not willing to have any further contact
with her child’s school or class activities. For a time, she had required her
husband leave work early to pick up
their daughter because she “couldn’t
show her face” at the school.
Being an involved mother was important to her, so she agreed to challenge herself to experience some
undesired emotions to care for her
daughter. First, she returned to school
pickup, and when she did so, she felt an
“anxious rush” while waiting in the car
line. She was instructed to simply ask
herself whether she was willing to have
that feeling, and to encourage willingness. She found the anxious feelings
subsided rather quickly as soon as her
child got in the car. After 2 weeks of
regular pickup, a day of late activity required her to go to the classroom.
Again, she made note of the physical
sensations, including blushing and feeling fearful and slightly nauseous, and
focused on her willingness to have
these feelings in the service of being the
mother she wanted to be. She continued this same exercise of willingness
over and over, until Shirley felt that she
had resumed all her previous activities.
By this time, Shirley was even ready to
try again with a snack for the class
Valentine’s Day party, and was willing
to experience whatever came up in this
endeavor.
Clinical Example
Phillip was in therapy for motivational
problems at work. In exploring his
overall values, Phillip was asked to
close his eyes and imagine his funeral.
In this fantasy exercise, anything was
possible, so he was to select all the people he wanted to attend his funeral, not
just those he thought would attend. He
then imagined selecting someone to
speak about him, and what that person
would say. He then imagined two or
three more people speaking about him, 
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 297
Metaphors
Metaphors offer the opportunity of both a memorable way to present a concept
of change, and an indirect mode of suggestion that may minimize reactance or
resistance. A visually vivid metaphor can create an image that crystallizes an
abstract concept that might be difficult to remember in verbal form. Many clinical metaphors have been developed and tested for use in the clinical approach
of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Hayes et al., 1999). In addition to
using common metaphors, selecting metaphors for change principles can be
guided by the client’s own life experiences and interests.
Clinical Example (Continued)
and what they would say about his actions, his intentions, and his impact on
others. After the fantasy concluded
with some final words about how he
would be missed and remembered,
Phillip and his therapist reviewed his
reactions.
Phillip discovered that he wanted
people to recognize him as a devoted
member of his church and a willing
participant in charitable activities. He
imagined the church filled with dozens
of people who had known him for a
long time, many of whom attested to
his extensive contributions to the community. He also felt that, in the end, his
work success was relatively unimportant, and that his current motivation
issues were probably related to the
greater sense of priority he gave to
charitable activities. This helped him
also recognize that his primary motivation for work was to create stability and
social standing for his family, and not to
produce greater profits for the business.
With a clearer sense of why he was
pursuing his work, he overcame some
of his avoidance and frustration.
Clinical Example
Cathy felt overwhelmed when faced
with important decisions. She struggled
with several dimensions of decision
making, including the fear of making
a mistake, failing to make the right
choice, and feeling uncertain about
her own preferences. She identified a
metaphor that explained how she went
about making decisions, whenever possible, and the degree of certainty that
she perceived was necessary in making
a good decision. When she was small,
she had a favorite book that was entitled, Patty Likes Pink. The story depicted
a child who always knew what she
wanted, confidently choosing pink.
Patty was untroubled by doubt and seldom, if ever, experienced disappointment, because she lived entirely in a
world of pink. For Cathy, the story was
a metaphor for the desire to remove all
doubt, uncertainty, and risk of disappointment, but at the cost of a limited
scope of experience.
298 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Imagery Replacement
Images can be brought under conscious cognitive influence, much the same as
other verbal constructions. In instances where a client lacks positive images, or
tends to recall only negative images, a direct activation of positive or coping images may induce a more positive association or greater willingness to approach a
difficult situation. Positive images can also be used as a distraction technique for
disrupting ruminative thoughts, dwelling on intrusive or negative images, or
coping with a difficult or painful experience. The objective should not be to suppress or avoid the occurrence of any particular thought, but rather to prompt
the access to positive, enjoyable, or coping images. Creating a picture in the
mind activates the positive affect associated with the image.
Clinical Example
Marge, an elder client who was depressed since the death of her spouse,
had frequent visual images and memories of her husband in his sickbed, and
deceased at his funeral. She understood
these images were naturally going to
come into her mind. She did not try to
suppress them as they were part of a
grieving process. However, she was also
encouraged to activate additional images drawn from her memories of the
couple’s happy times together. She recalled the image of them on their wedding day, and some images from their
honeymoon. She remembered images
of the two of them on a camping trip,
holding hands and being close. Marge
found it very pleasant to linger on these
images, and to enjoy in her mind the
sense of being with her spouse and enjoying the soothing warmth of a campfire together.
Expressive Monologue
An expressive monologue is an exercise to help clients articulate feelings that
have been suppressed or unresolved for various reasons. The key element is
that the monologue is directed toward a specific person or group, approximating the experience of clients actually telling the person how they feel.
Sometimes this is referred to as the “empty chair” exercise, because it is
useful to imagine the person present, and to talk as if he or she is listening.
There may be a dialogue component to the exercise as well, where the recipient’s responses are included and a conversation enacted. Expressive monologue
can also be carried out in written form, perhaps as a letter to the designated
person. The letter is primarily for expressive purposes and is not necessarily
going to be sent. The client will choose that after completing the exercise. The
therapist can provide support and encouragement throughout the expression of
feelings.


Psychotherapy is a complex endeavor that requires extensive knowledge
and skill. To become competent as a psychotherapist, you must build a
strong repertoire of conceptual skills, relationship skills, and procedural skills.
Having addressed conceptual and relationship skills in the previous two chapters, we now turn to specific procedures used in psychotherapy.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Discuss the importance of having a range of procedural skills.
• Describe eight interpersonal and systems interventions.
• Describe eight affective interventions.
• Describe eight behavioral interventions.
• Describe eight cognitive interventions.
If you ask 10 laypersons what specific things a psychotherapist does, you
might be very surprised by what you hear. Try this, and see what you discover.
To some, there are few obvious differences between the actions of therapists
and the actions of good friends. Therapists listen, care, and offer supportive
comments as you need them. Others think of therapist actions as similar to a
scolding parent, complete with a wagging index finger, cajoling tone, and unfaltering advice. Still others magnify the therapist’s intellectual powers and infuse the clinical action with a mystical or psychic quality. The therapist absorbs
282 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
every detail and applies an elaborate understanding of deep motivations. Yet
another view expects the therapist to assist in emotional catharsis and the release of pent-up feelings. Such therapists would elicit intense affect, and assist
clients in expressive actions such as weeping, shouting, or thumping pillows.
Finally, and perhaps most popular, is the vision of the therapist as being gifted
with perfectly calm insight, quickly ascertaining the sources of emotional distress, and dispensing concrete, direct, and effective solutions. This therapist,
like the scolding parent, seems to have all the answers and can tell you how to
fix yourself in a few simple steps, without the authoritarian tone. In reality, all
these impressions are based on some kernel of truth about the specific interventions that therapists use.
Each of these descriptions is based on a different snapshot of the relevant
content of therapy, and the associated procedures or methods. Therapists have
traditionally identified themselves in one or another of these snapshots on the
basis of their chosen school or system of approach to psychotherapy. Clientcentered therapists are warm facilitators; psychodynamic therapists are intrapsychic interpreters; humanistic therapists are guides for personal discovery
and expression; and cognitive-behavioral therapists are coping skill dispensers.
Decades of accumulated research on the effectiveness of different systems
of psychotherapy have gradually induced a paradigm shift toward understanding the foundations of psychotherapy as a flexible set of procedures applied in
the context of a clinical relationship. Whether clinicians conceptualize psychotherapy as a set of empirically supported treatments designed to ameliorate specific clinical syndromes (e.g., Chambless & Hollon, 1998) or as empirically
supported relationships that are designed to meet the needs of specific persons
(e.g., Norcross, 2002; Wampold, 2001), adherence to a single school of therapy
and one-size-fits-all methods is increasingly outdated. As Norcross notes, “The
research shows an effective psychotherapist is one who employs specific methods, who offers strong relationships, and who customizes both discrete methods and relationship stances to the individual person and condition.”(2002,
p. 13). In essence, we are moving away from an “allegiance” model of practice
where the psychologist makes a categorical decision to adopt a single theoretical orientation and toward a broader scientific model where the psychologist integrates empirical information into a biopsychosocial model of human
behavior. The core units of competence with the biopsychosocial model are the
ability to think critically and to approach clinical phenomena in a systematic
and unbiased manner.
Applying Specific Procedures
As you read about specific procedures, keep in mind that the success of any intervention depends in part on the context in which it is applied. In practice,
both instrumental and interpersonal dimensions are part of the same context,
and have a reciprocal interaction (Safran & Muran, 2000). The usefulness and
potency, for good or ill, of any procedure is highly affected by when and how
the therapist applies it, for what purpose, and how the patient feels about it.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 283
The procedure may be well tested and useful in a general sense, but not workable in a given clinical situation for any number of reasons. The explanation of
the procedure may be insufficient, it may not suit the learning style of the particular patient, it may be awkward or uncomfortable to either party, or it may
be peripheral to the patient’s current problems, just to name a few possibilities.
Thus, you may find that these potentially effective procedures do not always
work in the straightforward way that our examples suggest.
Effectively using a broad range of procedures requires conceptual and
technical skill, timing, and interpersonal rapport. Stuffing a large number of
techniques into a given client’s therapy will not necessarily lead to better outcome. Overreliance on techniques or over-using a few techniques can make
therapy shallow and gimmicky. Forcing a particular procedure on a reluctant
client is perhaps the riskiest venture because the therapist might be confusing
the procedure with conceptualization, thinking that the essence of therapy is
defined by some prototypic action. The therapist may be caught in a “should”
and “must” trap about techniques of therapy. For example, the therapist might
think that every cognitive therapy session must include an automatic thought
record. There are many risks in this sort of rigidity, including the risk of alienating the client from the opportunity of therapy.
Readers should keep in mind both the interpersonal and clinical context
for any procedure. The following sections describe some of the basic tools with
which the provider can craft a more comprehensive intervention. These are not
intended to be exhaustive summaries, but rather a foundation of procedures for
building basic practice. For the sake of discussion, these procedures are divided
into interpersonal and systems, affective, behavioral, and cognitive categories,
reflecting the primary mode of the intervention. Each category includes descriptions of eight useful intervention procedures. In practice, these interventions are often combined and applied in the context of a collaborative
relationship. Other relevant factors including the principles, stages, and levels
of change are also part of the conceptualization that guides selection of procedures such as those described here.
Interpersonal and Systems Interventions
Interpersonal and systems interventions are geared toward functional
changes in patterns of communication and processes of social and group interactions. Depending on how the client presents for therapy, interventions of
this type may be appropriate early, in the middle, later, or instead of individually focused work. Clients with a chaotic, neglectful, controlling, or otherwise unstable family history may especially need to address the interpersonal
components of their problems. Interpersonal interventions develop skills and
interactions needed for effective functioning within relationships and groups.
For a given client, there may be internal barriers to more effective functioning
such as faulty beliefs or pent-up feelings that need to be addressed with affective and cognitive interventions either before or concomitant with interpersonal changes.
284 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Family and Cultural History
Family processes play a pivotal role in the psychosocial development of individual members. This is especially true for the impact of a family of origin on its
children, as some degree of connection to these family processes is present
throughout an individual’s life span. Family patterns are also embedded within
a cultural context of values, beliefs, and affiliations that shape the norms
within a family for acceptable behavior and expected family functioning (Teyber, 2006).
All approaches to therapy include at least an overview of family and cultural experiences that affected an individual’s child and adolescent development. Most core beliefs and associated behaviors have their origins in these
early experiences. The task of reviewing a family history can take an oral narrative form in therapy sessions or it can be written as a homework assignment
and discussed in the sessions. Yet another option is to illustrate a complete,
cross-generational family history with a formal genogram (McGoldrick, Gerson, & Shellenberger, 1999). The objective in such explorations is to better understand the client’s behavioral and emotional learning history. Hypotheses
can be drawn about the beliefs and conclusions the client formulated concerning the self and other people on the basis of these experiences with significant
others.
Interactions with family may have shaped the personal beliefs “I am
unimportant,” and “other people will reject my needs.” When activated, these
beliefs will likely show up in current interactions discussed in therapy, and in
relating to the therapist. Connecting beliefs to the family history spotlights the
implicit, inflexible and durable nature of these ideas as the basis for a pattern of
relating to the self and the world.
When these beliefs arise during the therapy interaction (e.g., if the client
is overly apologetic about rescheduling an appointment), the therapist can spot
the activation of the core belief and help the client recognize the pattern and
learn to discriminate the past from the present. In addition, the healing process
includes helping the client to realistically understand family events and coalitions and to come to terms with both the good news and the bad news in their
families (Teyber, 2006). Important areas to explore include family economic
and health history, major events, cultural affiliations, affective and behavioral
rules, and the impact of any family secrets.
Case Example
Donna came to therapy because of acute
anxiety problems. Her mother had died
suddenly a few years ago, and ever since
then, Donna has suffered recurrent
panic attacks and depression. Her childhood had been economically, socially,
and geographically unstable, with her
mother as the source of reassurance
during tough times. Her father was a
minister who moved from church to
church, eventually alienating each successive congregation with his stern,
judgmental, and self-centered attitudes.
He made favorable first impressions
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 285
Trace an Interpersonal Developmental Time Line
An overview of the client’s personal developmental time line in terms of interpersonal skills, challenges and resources can refine global self-perceptions and
activate a hopeful perspective. Being in a state of distress often produces memory distortions such that current difficulties are recalled as being continuously
present, and are then projected to either stay just as bad or worsen indefinitely
into the future. The client says, “It’s always been this bad, I’ve been a misfit my
whole life. If I am not any better with my relationships now, how am I ever
going to face the challenges of my future? I’ll certainly fail and be alone forever.” If encouraged to test the accuracy of this thought directly, the client is
most likely to defend the perception as true.
Another way to test the accuracy of this generalization is to go back in time.
For many clients, it may be useful to begin the time line in childhood, perhaps
Case Example (Continued)
with his impassioned approach to religious leadership, but inevitably he
would cross the wrong person and have
to move on to another locale. He was
emotionally distant and punitive with
his children, and he expected most of all
that they should make him look good in
public. The children were strongly admonished not to discuss their father’s
methods of corporal punishment outside
their home, and they were not allowed
to talk back to him. Donna learned “I
must seek the approval of others,” and
“other people are threats to my safety.”
At her mother’s funeral, Donna had
the opportunity to have contact with
her mother’s family, with whom they
had very little communication over the
years. She even met several cousins and
their families for the first time and
found them to be warm and charming.
This did not fit at all with the negative
image of heathen, immoral alcoholabusers that had been offered by her
parents as the reason for the family distance. In talking with her maternal
aunt, Donna discovered the true reason
for their distance had been her own
mother’s shame over her father’s instability and abusive behavior toward the
children and her father’s controlling attitudes about family associations. There
was a history of alcoholism in her
mother’s family, which was the main
reason that her father had discouraged
and even forbidden their contact.
Donna was now redefining her family relationships, including her family
of origin and her extended family of
in-laws. She wanted to be more assertive and increase her contact with
her mother’s family and decrease her
contact with her father, and limit her
interactions with certain in-laws who
seemed to be highly status oriented,
but she found this triggered her global
fears of disapproval. In discussing her
choices with her therapist, it became
evident in their interaction that she
was also seeking the therapist’s endorsement as part of the interpersonal
pattern of her core belief about the
need for approval of her actions.
286 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
their preschool years, and inquire about interpersonal functioning in segments of
time proceeding through their development. The perspective gained by this exercise, in addition to a vast wealth of information about their life history, is often
one of ups and downs. At a broad level, the global conclusion that “I’ve always
been a misfit,” is disconfirmed by the historical review. Important information
about functional relationships can be used in planning current options and alternatives (see cognitive interventions).
Take a Current Interpersonal Inventory
People interact within interpersonal circles and social networks. Taking an inventory of current interpersonal relationships provides a systematic way to
focus on these relationships. Important dimensions of these relationships can
then be discussed, such as degree of intimacy, frequency of communication,
power and influence, and connections with specific group affiliations. An adequately populated and functioning social network is needed to satisfy individual emotional needs for companionship and enjoyment. Affiliations with
others also create a social reference group and a means of constructing and
maintaining a social identity. A current inventory can pinpoint gaps and possible deficits as well as areas of tension or conflict. This inventory can begin with
a list of important current relationships as well as more casual contacts or acquaintances, followed by an exploration of potential areas of discomfort, difficulty, and potential change.
Clinical Example
When Jan lamented that she had been
a “reject” her whole life, her therapist
remarked that this was indeed an exceptionally rare problem. Because success and failure are typically coexisting
processes that come and go in everyone’s life, it might be important to understand how Jan could have only
continuous failure. Usually the feelings
of success or failure wax and wane over
time as life tasks are alternately easier
or more difficult.
So to really get a sense of this in any
one particular life, it is useful to trace a
time line with notation of any recognizable successes or failures. They began, in
a systematic way, to trace Jan’s life experiences in segments of 5 years, beginning from birth to age five, when Jan
succeeded in many interpersonal tasks
(forming a place in her family, learning
basic verbal manners such as “please”
and “thank-you,” attended mother’s day
out), but perhaps failed in others (too
afraid of the other children to ride the
bus to school). The time line continued
in this way, traced out on successive
sheets of paper, bringing interpersonal
experiences and skills into the present
day. In the end, many forgotten or unacknowledged successes were brought to
light, and failures were put into perspective, so Jan’s overall conclusions
about her interpersonal skills and value
were less globally negative and failure
oriented.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 287
Explore Roles and Role Transitions
Most people will assume different social roles over the course of a lifetime.
From student to apprentice to friend, relative, coworker, adult, boss, teacher,
parent, spouse, neighbor, classmate, professional or many others, our social
roles have a fundamental impact on our psychological sense of self and worth.
Some of our roles are deeply invested with meaning whereas others may be
considered peripheral or relatively unimportant. Being a parent may be central
for some while roles held for employment are simply jobs that are necessary to
pay the bills. For others, career roles have high priority, but family roles are incidental. Most people strive for some balance of family and career roles as both
are important to their sense of self.
Difficulties with role adjustment are possible targets for therapeutic intervention when psychosocial roles are ambiguous, overloaded, or ill-fitted to the
skills or expectations of the individual. Many role difficulties will emerge during a time of transition, when any discrepancy between the skills and abilities
of the individual and the role demands becomes apparent. This may occur because the person does not fully understand the tasks and demands, does not
have the skills for fulfilling the demands or has become incapacitated by the increasing demands of multiple roles or significantly more complex roles. Discussion of the specific expectations and requirements of the role and the process of
change can help mobilize a more effective coping perspective. When needed,
Clinical Example
Ray was depressed and lonely. He was
estranged from his extended family, his
father was deceased, his mother was in
a nursing home due to severe and progressive dementia, and his only sibling
lived in a distant state and was disabled
by years of alcohol and drug abuse. He
and his wife were separated but not divorced due to religious reasons, and
they rarely spoke. His work as a consultant required regular travel throughout
the country for short-term assignments,
and as a result, he had no work colleagues to speak of. His office was in his
home, where he lived alone. Because of
his work travel, he kept no pets. He no
longer attended church and he belonged
to no groups or associations.
Ray’s interpersonal network had
such a deficit in the number of people
that he was basically interpersonally
impoverished. His social skills for casual interactions were strong, as he had
no problem traveling about and interacting with new people in different
work settings all the time. However, his
skills in making and establishing more
intimate friendships and relationships
that would continue past a fleeting
contact were much more limited. In addition, conflicts and tensions from his
family of origin affected not only the
number of people participating in his
life, but his willingness to risk trust and
intimacy with others.
288 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
specific skill development may help with role adjustment. For example, retirement planning classes may help with the shift from full-time professional to
part-time volunteer.
Provide Instruction in Assertive Communication Skills
This intervention involves assisting clients in recognizing and choosing to express their thoughts and feelings in a manner that is conducive to effective social interactions. The focus of the intervention is the behavioral expression of
clients’ underlying feelings in ways that show respect for both self and others.
This intervention has several components. First, the client learns to recognize signs of unassertiveness, such as being too passive and feeling victimized
or disappointed, or signs of being too aggressive, demanding, or inattentive to
Clinical Example
Mark came to therapy at the insistence
of his wife, Renee, who was at her wit’s
end with role overload. She was working full time, taking care of their infant
daughter, and helping Mark’s mother
deal with breast cancer and a failing
business. Mark had completed a college
degree in music education and a master’s degree in educational administration, but he had yet to apply for any
jobs. Instead, he spent his days at home,
smoking pot and playing video games.
Renee took the baby to day-care,
worked all day at an administrative job
she disliked, picked up the baby, and returned home, only to be greeted by
Mark, sitting on the sofa surrounded by
mess, asking “what do you want to do
about dinner?” Mark would then go to
the supermarket, if Renee gave him a
list, although he might get sidetracked
by stopping off to visit with friends
along the way. Mark was comfortable
in his role of extended adolescence, but
was on the verge of failure in fulfilling
the new roles of spouse and father. Part
of Mark’s difficulty was role ambiguity.
He had not given much thought to the
actual changes that were taking place
in his life and thus did not become oriented toward the new roles. He was
still in his mid-20s and he viewed adult
responsibilities as something for his
30s. This was still the time for having
fun, and as long as Renee was working
and they could pay their bills, he did
not see the need to make any changes.
Sometimes role transitions can be
eased by obtaining practical help from
other people, at least until the skills
needed for the new role can be fully developed. Some roles are demanding precisely because there added or more
complex responsibilities. Sometimes delegation to others is unavoidable. The
client may not have attempted to obtain
help because of the effort or expense, because of being unfamiliar or uncomfortable with doing so, or because assistance
was not readily available. Many people
either are in a practical situation where
they do not have ready access to people
as resources, or are in a psychological situation where they avoid this option.
There may be internal cognitive or emotional barriers to this process (e.g., “I
should be able to handle all this myself; I
am failing if I do not.”). However, at a
fundamental practical level, it is important to ask whether the role strain could
be eased by obtaining assistance.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 289
the rights of others. Second, the client practices consideration of the possible
choices for expressing thoughts and feelings in the context of specific situations. Therapists can discuss with the client different ways to assert feelings,
such as refusing an offer, expressing an opinion, or making a request, and practice some actual words or statements to use.
These actions need to be placed in an overall context for effectiveness in a
social situation. For example, refusing an offer from a nervous second-grader
who is trying to sell gift wrap for her school is very different from refusing a
sales pitch from a professional salesperson offering timeshare vacation condominiums. The benefits of assertive communication will likely be greatest when
sufficient consideration of mutual respect (respecting both the rights of self and
the rights of others) and social context is given. Thus, this technique involves
developing skills in recognizing one’s feelings, sizing up the situation, and
choosing a response, as well as finding some effective words and using them in
a respectful way. The essence of assertiveness may rest in the recognition of the
choices available in social situations, and the specific exercise of a choice.
Routines and Rituals
Routines and rituals help to stabilize individual and group systems by ensuring
that crucial tasks are completed. Informal routines of daily habits provide a
structure that gives continuity and a sense of security to ambiguous and repetitive situations.
Encourage the client’s use of routine to stabilize behavior or improve the
efficiency of important tasks. Having a particular sequence of behavior at bedtime can help ensure a restful night of sleep. Getting back to the routines of
Clinical Example
Thirteen-year-old Ian was embarrassed
and angry with his math teacher for habitually mispronouncing his name with
a long vowel sound like “eye,” and teasingly referring to him as the “eye-man.”
Thus far, Ian had said nothing to the
teacher, but he had gotten a detention
for talking in his class and not paying
attention. Ian and his therapist noted
that he was feeling distressed and angry, but his behavior was passive and
indirect, possible signs of unassertiveness. His therapist pointed out that although it might not be easy, Ian did
have the option of sharing his feelings
more directly with the teacher, and
making a request. They considered the
best time to initiate this communication and practiced the specific actions
with a role-play. Ian decided to stay after school and approach his teacher
when there was less likelihood of anyone else being around. He practiced acknowledging possible thoughts and
feelings of the teacher, acknowledging
his own feelings, and making a request.
His intended communication was to
sound something like this: “Mr. Green,
I know you like to make things funny
in class, but I get embarrassed being
called eye-man. I would like it better if
you would use the pronunciation of my
name that my parents use, which is eean. Thanks.”
290 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
everyday living with designated times for regular tasks can be stabilizing in the
wake of a traumatic event, or in recovering from a significant loss. From reading the newspaper every morning to exercise on Monday-Wednesday-Friday to
grocery shopping and laundry on Saturday to eating waffles on Sunday, the
regular routine provides consistency and direction. Key to an effectively functioning system, is the ability to adjust routines as needed to meet temporary demands for flexibility.
Formal rituals also serve important emotional functions. Cultural rituals
such as weddings, funerals, graduations, and holiday gatherings create a sanctioned way to acknowledge membership within the group. Participating in such
rituals gives the individual an impetus to focus on the emotional component of
the relationships, to express emotions in a social context, to acknowledge both
change and continuity in relationships and groups and to attach meaning to
specific social commitment.
Attending a funeral of someone who has died usually helps us process our
own feelings of grief, loss, and separation by sharing those feelings with other
loved ones, recognizing the social changes precipitated by the death, and gaining perspective on the importance of friends, family members, or even fond acquaintances. Other more joyful rituals help us and those around us recognize
our movement through life (e.g., graduations, weddings, christenings, birthday
parties) and attach certain emotions and meaning to that movement. The obvious exception to this strategy is the problem of obsessive-compulsive behavior
that involves excessive and senseless rituals that interfere with normal living.
Family and Collateral Meetings
Consultation with family members or significant others can be useful in many
therapeutic contexts. Sometimes the family unit is the focus of treatment and
all sessions involve some combination of family members. Usually one person
is the identified patient and any others present are identified as “collateral” participants. Family consultations are usually actively structured and directed by
the therapist in pursuit of specific goals. Typical goals for collateral consultaClinical Example
Molly felt enduring guilt about having
had an affair with a married man when
she was in college, even after extensive
work with cognitive reframing. Although it had been a long while since she
had participated in religious services, she
was receptive to the idea of attending
services designed for atonement. She decided to attend services with an attitude
of simply participating in the ritual and
being open to whatever might occur. In
reporting back to her therapist, she described a wonderful and liberating experience that crystallized when she read a
particular scriptural passage that she had
not fully noticed in the past. The passage
instructed the reader to turn away from
sin and to live; in reading this, she saw
the intended message as letting go of her
guilt and moving forward with her life.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 291
tions include one or more of the following: gathering information, sharing information among participants, providing psychoeducation, identifying primary
concerns, expressing feelings, improving communication patterns and skills,
communicating about progress and change, facilitating stress management,
conflict resolution or problem solving, and evaluating and stabilizing roles and
emotional involvement.
Balance Autonomy and Relationship/Group Affiliation
Our culture is very heterogeneous with respect to an emphasis on individual
pursuits over social and familial commitments (see Chapter 3). We tend to endorse the freedom to pursue one’s true inner self, yet we still define one another and ourselves through various relationships and memberships. This
freedom can bring confusion or tension regarding a functional balance between personal fulfillment and social connection. Clients may come to therapy
as a result of the stress of such conflicts and need help reconciling their beliefs,
overcoming barriers that stand in the way of their choices, and recognizing behavioral options for personal and interpersonal involvements.
Signs of this imbalance might include feeling controlled by a relationship
or group membership, feeling stretched too thin and having no personal time at
all, not being able to say no to demands or expectations out of a fear of the social consequences, feeling compelled to do things that are personally harmful
or inconsistent with one’s values, becoming alienated from one’s priorities and
personal goals, or feeling alone and disconnected from any sense of belonging
to a community or dissatisfied and searching for something missing. The focus
of this intervention is to help the client see available choices for both making
and limiting interpersonal involvements with the goal of striking a personal
Clinical Example
Eloise’s severe arthritis at age 75 had
advanced to where she required a fulltime caregiver in her home. She was
delighted to have Robin with her each
day to help with dressing, bathing, eating, light correspondence, and outings
such as trips to the doctor and hairstylist. Each night, either Eloise’s husband
or his sister stayed with her in case she
needed any assistance during the night.
Eloise had been in intermittent
therapy for approximately 25 years for
recurrent depression and severe obsessive anxiety. Recently, she was devastated to find out that her husband had
a long-standing intimate relationship
with a younger woman that he was
unwilling to end. When Eloise returned for individual therapy, her therapist included some collateral visits
with Robin and Eloise as part of the
treatment plan. Robin provided information on Eloise’s mood, revealing
clear shifts related to the husband’s
comings and goings, particularly if he
was gone all night. Eloise was able to
express her appreciation to Robin for
her emotional support, and the therapist was able to provide Robin with
guidance and encouragement on managing the emotional and interpersonal
challenges of this situation.
292 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
balance that is healthy and functional. Using or developing assertive communication skills may be a part of implementing the choices in this intervention.
The behavioral implications of the client’s choices are to increase, decrease, or redirect selected interpersonal contacts. A client who does not want
to date a drinker would do well to steer clear of bars, nightclubs, and drinking
parties, and seek friendships through nondrinking venues. If a client thinks he
would enjoy more intellectual stimulation from others, enrolling in a class
might make this accessible. If a client would like to meet others with similar
political interests, it might be useful to volunteer for a political campaign.
Affective Interventions
Affective interventions are focused primarily on the experience of emotions
and bodily sensations. Objectives of affective interventions are to increase conscious awareness of the emotional components of an experience or situation, to
reduce avoidance of an affective reaction, to increase the client’s tolerance of
emotional experience, and to assist in the functional use of emotion. The overall goal is to shape the recognition of a range of affective states as a source of
vital information in adaptive living.
Intensity and authenticity are elements of the client’s subjective emotional experience that represent individual differences, and should be respected
Clinical Example
Ryan enjoyed his sales manager position, but the job required a great deal
of entertaining and socializing on the
nights and weekends. These work
events always included alcohol and
there was much heavy drinking by the
sales staff and the customers. Now that
he was married and had a young child,
Ryan wanted to spend more of his
evenings and weekends with his family.
He also wanted to pursue his hobby of
cycling for sport and fitness, but this
was an interest that few of his customers or coworkers shared. He felt as
though he had more bases than he
could reasonably cover and began to
think that his life was not going in the
direction he most desired. The significant financial rewards of his sales job
made Ryan feel successful, and he felt
strong bonds with several of his
coworkers, including the regional manager who was his mentor and “like a father figure.” When he tried to reduce
his contact with the socializing and
drinking, Ryan received much direct
and indirect pressure from his colleagues to maintain the status quo.
Ryan eventually decided that it was in
his best interest to make a career
change altogether. He resigned from his
position, began attending AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) to stop drinking,
and enrolled in a master’s degree program to earn his teaching certificate.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 293
as such. The clinician wants to avoid any implication that there is a “right” or
“proper” type or degree of emotion for any given situation. The expression of
emotion (e.g., anger) may have functional and dysfunctional parameters that
can be addressed with other behavioral, cognitive, or systems interventions.
Mindfulness Practice
There are many strategies of mindfulness practice (see Hanh, 1987; Hayes,
Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999; Linehan, 1993; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002).
The common thread among these approaches is the focusing of awareness on
internal components of experience and increasing one’s skill in observing perceptions, sensations, and thoughts without attempting to change them. Mindfulness can be done in a quiet, eyes-closed state, or it can be practiced during
an activity such as walking, folding laundry, or eating. This practice often has a
calming effect, although that is not a direct objective. Regular mindfulness
practice is intended to decrease the fusion between problematic thoughts or
emotions and actions, and promote greater awareness of the different dimensions of experience as contents of the mind.
Clinical Example
Betty kept worrying about a family situation that was beyond her control. It was
getting to the point that she barely noticed what she was doing during the day
as her mind focused on the family circumstance. She was instructed in mindfulness practice as a way to help herself
live fully with her experience of worry
and concern. Each day, for 10 minutes,
she would sit in a quiet place and focus
her attention on feeling herself breathing, noticing any bodily sensations as
they occurred, without struggling with
those sensations or trying to get rid of
them. She practiced noticing the content
of her mind, without judging or evaluating it, or pursuing the content in any directed way. She would notice that
worries about her family were popping
into her mind, but she did not attempt
either to get rid of them, or to try to
search for possible solutions. She simply
refocused her attention on breathing
again and again, and would always conclude the exercise with attention to her
breathing.
Emotional Deepening and Validation
Helping clients identify, deepen, or extend their understanding of the emotion,
and accept rather than deny or reject the experience is a fundamental affective
technique. This begins with listening actively for indications of emotional content, and providing reflective feedback to the client. Bringing explicit attention
to the emotional domain, and helping to provide labels for the emotions gives
importance to this dimension of the client’s personal experience, and can help
articulate the experience (see L. S. Greenberg et al., 1993; Linehan, 1993).
294 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Beginning therapists are often prone to underestimate the importance of
this technique and become frustrated with “just listening and not doing anything.” To overcome this error, it is helpful to realize the potential benefit in
skillfully attending to emotional content, appropriately drawing this into the
discussion, encouraging the client to attend to the thoughts and sensations that
are aroused, and providing crucial social support in the form of validating the
understandable triggers of the emotional response.
Clients may have in the past or present encountered those who invalidate
their emotions (“You shouldn’t be depressed; cheer up!”), and they may have
acquired the habit of invalidating their own emotions. Effective listening and
validation by the therapist will often, but not always, help clients reduce their
level of distress, and begin to induce some positive affect as well as a greater receptiveness to problem-solving or suggestion.
Clinical Example
Kay was troubled by family interactions
with her parents. In the following dialogue, the therapist draws emotional
content explicitly into the discussion
and validates Kay’s experience.
Kay: It’s weird when my parents visit.
They’re really a big help with the
kids and all, but they’re so messy,
and they’re always giving me advice
about what my husband should be
doing better.
Therapist: So some conflicting feelings
come up when they visit. It sounds
like you feel happy and grateful for
their help with the kids, but uncomfortable with the unwanted help
with your husband, and the added
stress of more mess in your house.
Kay: (Nods) Uh huh. I don’t want to be
ungrateful, or take advantage of
them, and I do want them to visit,
and have a relationship with the
kids. Oh, I don’t know. I should just
count my blessings and stop griping.
Therapist: Well, we can certainly take
some time to talk about ways to deal
with these feelings that make you
want to gripe. But first, let’s take
time for you to understand those
feelings and have room to have them.
It makes sense to me that you would
feel pulled in two directions given
these circumstances, feeling both
grateful and annoyed at the same
time. Does that describe some of
your experience?
Kay: Yes. I think I’m mainly annoyed
with myself that I can’t just ignore
what they say about Bob and go on.
Therapist: Do you feel that tension inside yourself right now?
Kay: (tearing up) Yes. My throat and
stomach are tight. I just don’t know
how to respond to what they say, so I
just try to blow it off.
Therapist: Well, it seems logical that a
person would feel some tension and
distress when two feelings are conflicting like this, especially when
those feelings are related to such important relationships.
This dialogue would continue with
exploring the client’s feelings and eventually move toward problem solving,
encouraging the client to recognize how
she tends to invalidate and dismiss her
own feelings and modeling an alternative of acceptance via the therapeutic
interaction.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 295
Interoceptive Exposure
The experience of an affective state may trigger a reaction of fear and avoidance, perhaps because of beliefs related to the unacceptability of certain feelings or their outward expressions, or possible dangerousness of the internal
sensations. Avoiding these internal sensations can lead to broad and elaborate
networks of avoidance and safety behavior.
For lasting change to occur, it may be necessary to work directly on exposure to the actual sensations, to increase tolerance and decrease the sense of associated threat, and to detect any especially problematic thoughts connected to
the sensation. The particular internal sensations feared by the client will be
unique, but are typically associated with an uncomfortable or undesirable outcome, such as choking, collapsing, or dying. Interoceptive exposure involves
activating those sensations, typically in low to medium intensity, to allow for
deconstruction of the sensation in physical terms (e.g., just tension in the muscles) and greater tolerance for the physical experience as well as recognition of
its passing nature, thus decreasing the perceived threat and concomitant fear of
the sensation.
Willingness Exercises
Willingness interventions are exercises of the client’s choice to pursue a desired
activity with the understanding that certain undesired emotions may occur. The
exercise is one of being willing to have the emotion if it occurs, and still carry
on with the plan. So the client might choose to be willing to go to work, even
though depression or a sad mood might occur. Or the client might choose to
give a presentation, even though anxiety might be part of the experience. The
objective of these exercises is to pursue behaviors or activities that are important to the client and give meaning to their life, without trying to control all
emotional components of the experience. The client is practicing the willingness to have emotions.
Clinical Example
When Bob felt panicky, he was especially troubled by tension in his throat,
difficulty in swallowing, and a choking
sensation. These symptoms were explained as due to muscle tension activated by a fear response and not
indicative of any state of medical compromise. Bob had recently been evaluated medically and was deemed to be in
good health. With his therapist’s
prompting, Bob practiced bringing on
the sensations of tension in his throat
and chest. He was instructed to tighten
the muscles in his throat, and then to
stop a swallow half-way through and
hold it for 30 seconds. Then he tightened his chest and held his breath for
45 seconds. This was repeated several
times, each time discussing the degree
of distress Bob felt with the sensations,
noting that his distress went down with
repeated exposures.
296 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Values Assessment
Values exercises bring out the client’s emotional investment in various life activities. Values are pursuits or roles that have an importance for the client that
will typically endure across time and situations. Some values may be more
salient at different times in life, and thus matter more because of developmental demands. Being a good parent may take priority over other important values
when the client is raising young children. An unmarried, childless client may
highly value being a good parent, but other values such as career or friendships
have more immediate salience. We can help clients detect the strength of their
attachment to various values, and connect this to the direction of their energy.
Clinical Example
Shirley prepared a special healthy
snack for her daughter’s first-grade
class and then felt humiliated when the
children did not like it. She was so upset by this personal failure that she was
not willing to have any further contact
with her child’s school or class activities. For a time, she had required her
husband leave work early to pick up
their daughter because she “couldn’t
show her face” at the school.
Being an involved mother was important to her, so she agreed to challenge herself to experience some
undesired emotions to care for her
daughter. First, she returned to school
pickup, and when she did so, she felt an
“anxious rush” while waiting in the car
line. She was instructed to simply ask
herself whether she was willing to have
that feeling, and to encourage willingness. She found the anxious feelings
subsided rather quickly as soon as her
child got in the car. After 2 weeks of
regular pickup, a day of late activity required her to go to the classroom.
Again, she made note of the physical
sensations, including blushing and feeling fearful and slightly nauseous, and
focused on her willingness to have
these feelings in the service of being the
mother she wanted to be. She continued this same exercise of willingness
over and over, until Shirley felt that she
had resumed all her previous activities.
By this time, Shirley was even ready to
try again with a snack for the class
Valentine’s Day party, and was willing
to experience whatever came up in this
endeavor.
Clinical Example
Phillip was in therapy for motivational
problems at work. In exploring his
overall values, Phillip was asked to
close his eyes and imagine his funeral.
In this fantasy exercise, anything was
possible, so he was to select all the people he wanted to attend his funeral, not
just those he thought would attend. He
then imagined selecting someone to
speak about him, and what that person
would say. He then imagined two or
three more people speaking about him, 
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 297
Metaphors
Metaphors offer the opportunity of both a memorable way to present a concept
of change, and an indirect mode of suggestion that may minimize reactance or
resistance. A visually vivid metaphor can create an image that crystallizes an
abstract concept that might be difficult to remember in verbal form. Many clinical metaphors have been developed and tested for use in the clinical approach
of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Hayes et al., 1999). In addition to
using common metaphors, selecting metaphors for change principles can be
guided by the client’s own life experiences and interests.
Clinical Example (Continued)
and what they would say about his actions, his intentions, and his impact on
others. After the fantasy concluded
with some final words about how he
would be missed and remembered,
Phillip and his therapist reviewed his
reactions.
Phillip discovered that he wanted
people to recognize him as a devoted
member of his church and a willing
participant in charitable activities. He
imagined the church filled with dozens
of people who had known him for a
long time, many of whom attested to
his extensive contributions to the community. He also felt that, in the end, his
work success was relatively unimportant, and that his current motivation
issues were probably related to the
greater sense of priority he gave to
charitable activities. This helped him
also recognize that his primary motivation for work was to create stability and
social standing for his family, and not to
produce greater profits for the business.
With a clearer sense of why he was
pursuing his work, he overcame some
of his avoidance and frustration.
Clinical Example
Cathy felt overwhelmed when faced
with important decisions. She struggled
with several dimensions of decision
making, including the fear of making
a mistake, failing to make the right
choice, and feeling uncertain about
her own preferences. She identified a
metaphor that explained how she went
about making decisions, whenever possible, and the degree of certainty that
she perceived was necessary in making
a good decision. When she was small,
she had a favorite book that was entitled, Patty Likes Pink. The story depicted
a child who always knew what she
wanted, confidently choosing pink.
Patty was untroubled by doubt and seldom, if ever, experienced disappointment, because she lived entirely in a
world of pink. For Cathy, the story was
a metaphor for the desire to remove all
doubt, uncertainty, and risk of disappointment, but at the cost of a limited
scope of experience.
298 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Imagery Replacement
Images can be brought under conscious cognitive influence, much the same as
other verbal constructions. In instances where a client lacks positive images, or
tends to recall only negative images, a direct activation of positive or coping images may induce a more positive association or greater willingness to approach a
difficult situation. Positive images can also be used as a distraction technique for
disrupting ruminative thoughts, dwelling on intrusive or negative images, or
coping with a difficult or painful experience. The objective should not be to suppress or avoid the occurrence of any particular thought, but rather to prompt
the access to positive, enjoyable, or coping images. Creating a picture in the
mind activates the positive affect associated with the image.
Clinical Example
Marge, an elder client who was depressed since the death of her spouse,
had frequent visual images and memories of her husband in his sickbed, and
deceased at his funeral. She understood
these images were naturally going to
come into her mind. She did not try to
suppress them as they were part of a
grieving process. However, she was also
encouraged to activate additional images drawn from her memories of the
couple’s happy times together. She recalled the image of them on their wedding day, and some images from their
honeymoon. She remembered images
of the two of them on a camping trip,
holding hands and being close. Marge
found it very pleasant to linger on these
images, and to enjoy in her mind the
sense of being with her spouse and enjoying the soothing warmth of a campfire together.
Expressive Monologue
An expressive monologue is an exercise to help clients articulate feelings that
have been suppressed or unresolved for various reasons. The key element is
that the monologue is directed toward a specific person or group, approximating the experience of clients actually telling the person how they feel.
Sometimes this is referred to as the “empty chair” exercise, because it is
useful to imagine the person present, and to talk as if he or she is listening.
There may be a dialogue component to the exercise as well, where the recipient’s responses are included and a conversation enacted. Expressive monologue
can also be carried out in written form, perhaps as a letter to the designated
person. The letter is primarily for expressive purposes and is not necessarily
going to be sent. The client will choose that after completing the exercise. The
therapist can provide support and encouragement throughout the expression of
feelings.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 299
Behavioral Interventions
Behavioral interventions focus on concrete actions and responses of the client
with the goal of establishing functional and adaptive patterns of behavior.
Adaptive behavior may be very circumscribed (e.g., to be near dogs) or it may
be very broad (to be a better parent). Behavioral interventions address what
the client does, not just in isolated instances, but repeatedly over time. Often
behavioral interventions help the client acquire new responses and build skills.
Or they may prompt or trigger previously learned responses, generalize those
responses to new situations, or better match the client’s behavior to appropriate
situations.
Adaptive behavior can be acquired through observation, practice and positive reinforcement. Maladaptive behavior can be weakened by developing incompatible alternative behavior. The unit of interest may be fairly small, but is
important in activating or disrupting a chain of other behaviors. When complex
skills are involved, the unit of interest might include several elements, including cognitive elements. Cognitive and behavioral interventions are often intertwined, but are presented separately here for descriptive purposes.
Clinical Example
Ben’s best friend was killed in a hit-andrun car accident while attending graduate school. Given the demands of their
respective busy schedules and living in
different cities, Ben had not been in contact with Matt in a few months. He felt
devastated by the news of Matt’s death
and extremely remorseful over having
been out of touch. Ben’s therapist asked
him to participate in an exercise of expressing his feelings in a conversation
with Matt in the empty chair.
Therapist: Let’s bring Matt into the
room, and allow him to be here to
listen to what you most want to tell
him. Imagine he’s here in this chair
(points), and wants to hear what you
have to say. Go ahead and let him
know what’s in your heart.
Ben: “Matt, you were the best friend I
ever had, and you can only imagine
how much it hurts to lose you. I hate
it that your life ended this way, and if
you have any awareness in the afterlife, I bet you hate it, too. There’s a
great big hole in the place you used to
be . . . especially when I think about
having someone to share things with,
or just help me keep my head on
straight. I know I have other friends,
its true, but none of them will ever be
the friend I grew up with, went to
college with, chased all those girls
with, and had all the good times with.
And had a few rough spots, too. It’s
sad to think there will be no more
good times, no more rough spots, just
memories. Somebody else will have
to be the best man in my wedding,
when it should have been you. But
when the time comes, I’ll be thinking
of you, so you’ll be there. You’ll always be there.”
Define Target Behavior and Monitor Baseline
Clients often come to therapy with vague goals that have no specific behavioral
reference points. If they state that they wish to be able to drive on freeways, or
to get their home in order, these goals imply behavioral objectives, even if more
specification is needed (e.g., which aspects of the home need to be gotten into
order, and what would the desired order look like?). When a client’s stated goal
is “to be less fearful,” or “to find self-confidence,” it is important to explore actions that could be associated with such a state, to provide anchor points and to
begin to translate diffuse objectives into something manageable and specific.
This is the process of creating an operational definition of the goal
in terms of target behaviors. The client can be asked, “What would selfconfidence allow you to do that you are not doing now?” Or perhaps, “What
are some of the things that self-confident people can do?” Or, “If fear didn’t
stand in your way, what would you be doing?” The operational definition
needs to be relevant and meaningful to the client. Using some generic idea of
300 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example
Marge, described earlier, came to therapy because she was depressed about
the death of her husband some months
ago, and she had a long history of anxiety and worry. Her stated goal was to
“not be so sad all the time.” The therapist asked Marge to describe what her
life was like before all the sadness.
Marge had always been quite active and
happy, even if she tended to worry and
fret. In recent years, most of her daily
structure had revolved around spending time with her husband who was in
a nursing care facility adjacent to her
assisted-living residence. Since his passing, she was at a loss for what to do
with each day other than to sit around
and be sad all the time.
Marge’s therapist suggested that being
sad following the death of a spouse was
understandable and that some degree of
sadness would likely remain with her,
but it could possibly ebb and flow over
time. The therapist then suggested that
they discuss some activities that she used
to do, with the broad behavioral target
of increasing her overall activity level.
They explored which activities helped
reduce sadness, and which did not. This
helped them set more specific targets for
activities that were valuable to Marge
and extracted her from the inactivity of
sadness. Thus, the operational definition
of her goal was to engage in more activities that brought her positive feelings instead of sadness.
For 2 weeks, Marge kept track of
how many times she ate a meal in the
company of others, either going to the
facility cafeteria, joining in on scheduled outings, making specific plans
with someone, or when a family member came to visit. She noted that she
was happier when she had meals with
others, and tended to be more sad and
“mopey” when she ate alone. In fact,
she tended to skip meals when she had
no companionship. Just keeping track
of this behavior encouraged her to
sign up for a facility-sponsored activity
where a group of residents went out together to a local restaurant.
what a self-confident or less fearful person “should” do would be unlikely to
help the client.
The next step in beginning to change a behavior or class of behavior is to
monitor its frequency and circumstances of occurrence, without any specific attempts to change the behavior yet. Baseline monitoring is extremely helpful for
increasing clients’ awareness of their actions, as well as connections with triggers, associated thoughts, and emotional and social consequences. Baseline
monitoring is usually nonthreatening and a good way to increase the client’s involvement in therapy and movement toward active change.
Greater compliance is likely to be achieved with simple methods of monitoring, such as making a check mark on an index card, or making a note in a
calendar when and if an action occurred. The frequency of a specific thought or
class of thoughts, such as dwelling on a bad test grade, or thinking about a
spouse’s limitations can also be monitored. Infrequent behaviors that the client
wants to increase should be monitored to determine if there is indeed a low frequency. This may be the case, or it may be that the client has a problem with
distorted perceptions or judgment, perhaps the result of a mood disorder. If the
client says that he never or hardly ever gets to exercise, it might be helpful to
use a calendar monitoring exercise activities and to count up the current frequency of occurrence in a week’s time. The process of observation alone may
produce some change, often referred to as “reactivity.” If this occurs, it can be
regarded positively as a sign of the client’s readiness to change as well as ability
to self-regulate behavior through awareness and intention.
Scheduled Activities for Pleasure and Mastery
This intervention involves prompting or scheduling behaviors that are likely to
elicit positive internal experiences. Positive activities might be something commonly regarded as enjoyable (e.g., watching a movie, sitting in the sunshine),
specifically pleasurable to the client (e.g., getting a manicure, hitting golf
balls), or related to a sense of mastery or accomplishment for the client, given
his or her current mood, strengths, and responsibilities (e.g., doing the taxes,
scheduling an appointment, cooking a meal; A. T. Beck et al., 1979). This strategy may be most useful for clients who have clear deficits in positive affect and
a low or insufficient rate of behavior related to either pleasure or mastery.
Options for pleasure and mastery are selected by first generating a list
of possible activities that the client associates with the potential for positive
emotions such as joy, connection, pleasure, accomplishment, achievement,
or the like. It is important that the possible activities are ones that the client
finds acceptable and potentially worthwhile, and does not find demeaning or
immoral.
Generating such a list of options can be a significant task, particularly if
the client has a significant pattern of withdrawal, avoidance, or low emotional
engagement. In their self-help book on self-esteem, C. M. Nezu and Nezu
(2003) describe this task as developing a “joy profile,” and they draw from
three categories of activity—social, productive, and sensory pleasure. Generic
lists such as those offered by Nezu & Nezu can prompt ideas that might be appealing or suitable for a particular individual. Exploring the client’s past for
Therapeutic Methods: Buil

what a self-confident or less fearful person “should” do would be unlikely to
help the client.
The next step in beginning to change a behavior or class of behavior is to
monitor its frequency and circumstances of occurrence, without any specific attempts to change the behavior yet. Baseline monitoring is extremely helpful for
increasing clients’ awareness of their actions, as well as connections with triggers, associated thoughts, and emotional and social consequences. Baseline
monitoring is usually nonthreatening and a good way to increase the client’s involvement in therapy and movement toward active change.
Greater compliance is likely to be achieved with simple methods of monitoring, such as making a check mark on an index card, or making a note in a
calendar when and if an action occurred. The frequency of a specific thought or
class of thoughts, such as dwelling on a bad test grade, or thinking about a
spouse’s limitations can also be monitored. Infrequent behaviors that the client
wants to increase should be monitored to determine if there is indeed a low frequency. This may be the case, or it may be that the client has a problem with
distorted perceptions or judgment, perhaps the result of a mood disorder. If the
client says that he never or hardly ever gets to exercise, it might be helpful to
use a calendar monitoring exercise activities and to count up the current frequency of occurrence in a week’s time. The process of observation alone may
produce some change, often referred to as “reactivity.” If this occurs, it can be
regarded positively as a sign of the client’s readiness to change as well as ability
to self-regulate behavior through awareness and intention.
Scheduled Activities for Pleasure and Mastery
This intervention involves prompting or scheduling behaviors that are likely to
elicit positive internal experiences. Positive activities might be something commonly regarded as enjoyable (e.g., watching a movie, sitting in the sunshine),
specifically pleasurable to the client (e.g., getting a manicure, hitting golf
balls), or related to a sense of mastery or accomplishment for the client, given
his or her current mood, strengths, and responsibilities (e.g., doing the taxes,
scheduling an appointment, cooking a meal; A. T. Beck et al., 1979). This strategy may be most useful for clients who have clear deficits in positive affect and
a low or insufficient rate of behavior related to either pleasure or mastery.
Options for pleasure and mastery are selected by first generating a list
of possible activities that the client associates with the potential for positive
emotions such as joy, connection, pleasure, accomplishment, achievement,
or the like. It is important that the possible activities are ones that the client
finds acceptable and potentially worthwhile, and does not find demeaning or
immoral.
Generating such a list of options can be a significant task, particularly if
the client has a significant pattern of withdrawal, avoidance, or low emotional
engagement. In their self-help book on self-esteem, C. M. Nezu and Nezu
(2003) describe this task as developing a “joy profile,” and they draw from
three categories of activity—social, productive, and sensory pleasure. Generic
lists such as those offered by Nezu & Nezu can prompt ideas that might be appealing or suitable for a particular individual. Exploring the client’s past for
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 301
ideas about activities he or she used to enjoy is another method to detect possible options. Discussion about things the client finds intriguing or views as
“looking like fun” might be another avenue for new but untested options.
The behavioral component of the intervention is to then schedule a time
and place to try something new or to increase the frequency of activities on the
list. A client might designate the weekend as a time for one new pleasant activity such as attending a play or live music performance. The client might also
plan to use her break at work every day rather than skipping it and continuously working. By taking her break, she can increase her contact with pleasant
activities such as walking in the sunshine or visiting the cafeteria to chat with
coworkers.
From a behavioral standpoint, the effort made to engage in some activity
is the most important outcome to monitor. Some activities, such as regular exercise, require persistence through times of “not so much fun” to gain a tangible sense of accomplishment. Other activities, such as browsing the bookstore,
may be more reliably pleasant. Old pleasures may be outgrown, but first clients
must make the effort to find this out. Thus, the emphasis is placed on shaping a
pattern of behavior rather than producing immediate, specific results.
302 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example
Lorrie, a divorced mom with two
teenage boys at home, complained that
she felt completely overwhelmed by the
clutter and disorganization in her
home. She worked part-time and had
“plenty” of time to keep up her home.
When she tried to tackle the housework, she felt pangs of anxiety and
guilt about how much there was to do
and how badly she had let things slide.
These feelings would propel her into
her favorite easy chair to “relax” a bit
before getting started. Often, she either
fell asleep, or became caught up in
watching a sequence of television programs. A crisis developed when her air
conditioner failed during an extremely
hot spell of weather. Because her living
room was such a mess, she would not
call a repair person until she at least
cleared a path between the door and
the air-conditioning unit.
Accomplishing this small goal made
Lorrie more determined to work on organizing and cleaning her home, room
by room. Her social constrictions had
become extreme, to the point that she
would not allow her boys to have friends
over because the house was in such bad
shape. Motivated by her sense of
parental responsibility and her own desire to have a more presentable home,
she decided to schedule a weekend blitz
to start the cleanup. She called in a very
close friend to spend the weekend helping with the decluttering project. Together, they cleared out the major spaces
and organized the things that she
needed to keep. Lorrie found the impact
of these changes so pleasant and encouraging that she decided to schedule daily
housekeeping tasks to keep things in order. She also decided to schedule time
for exercise as a way to increase another
desired but difficult activity.
Graduated Tasks
This intervention involves breaking a more complex activity into its component
parts, and encouraging the client to undertake a challenging action by starting
with the easier components. A metaphor that is sometimes helpful in explaining this strategy is to imagine picking fruit from a tree or bush, and to think of
picking the ripest fruit within reach. One might think of picking the “lowest
apples first,” or the “ripest berries off the top.” This often goes hand in hand
with scheduling activities for pleasure and mastery because clients frequently
view a desired activity as too difficult or formidable to undertake as a whole,
especially if it is something new or previously untried. It is typically much easier to make small changes in a graduated manner, than to make large changes
and try to “leap tall buildings in a single bound.”
The following questions are helpful in establishing the graduated tasks:
“What is the first thing that you would want to do to get started?” Or, “What
needs to happen to make it possible to (engage in X)?” From this, a sequential
outline of each action can be developed, breaking things down into greater
detail when the client needs greater assistance because of roadblocks or lack
of clarity.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 303
Clinical Example
Sandra wanted to invite her family over
for a birthday dinner for her husband,
but she felt overwhelmed and anxious
about “throwing a party.” So she and
her therapist outlined a list of graduated
tasks that broke down this complex idea
of “throwing a party” into specific behavioral components. First, she identified a possible date and time (Sunday
evening, the week of his birthday).
Then she planned the components of
the meal and how she would get them
prepared (purchase prepared lasagna,
make a fresh salad and a cake, ask family members to bring appetizers).
Next, she phoned family members to
invite them and see if they could come.
After that, she purchased the needed
ingredients for the meal. She also purchased a special gift and wrappings as
well as a birthday banner and some
flowers for decorations. The day before
the dinner, she planned to clean up the
house by vacuuming the floor, dusting,
and cleaning the bathroom. On the
cleaning task, it was important to be
specific about what was really feasible
and necessary. Sandra recognized that
she could easily become overwhelmed
if she was not specific about what it
meant to “make the house presentable.” This did not have to include polishing the silver and cleaning the
gutters. On the day of the dinner, she
planned to bake the cake, make the
salad, and put on her favorite dress and
jewelry. The last items on the graduated list of tasks were to remind herself
to use her hostess social skills (when
guests arrive, open the door, smile and
greet them warmly, invite them in),
and to focus her attention on her family
rather than any worries or concerns
that might pop into her head.
Systematic Exposure
This intervention involves assisting the client to confront a difficult, anxietyprovoking situation through repeated or extended contact. Exposure can be
broken down into component parts of maximally tolerable contact, much like
the strategy of graduated tasks. However, the focus in systematic exposure is
the experience and toleration of arousal, and testing specific cognitions related
to that arousal or the stimulus itself. Exposure to one component or level of
arousal may need to be repeated a few or many times before the client is ready
or willing to undertake the next component. In graduated tasks, the components of the overall task tend to flow more readily, one to the next, without
much, if any, repetition.
304 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example
Craig, an expectant father, had a fear of
changing a baby’s diaper. He was afraid
that the baby would be uncooperative
and cry, urinate on him, or that he
would become nauseated by stool-filled
diapers, or be unable to wipe the baby’s
bottom and secure the clean diaper effectively. He was quite panicked by this
fear, thinking that it made him a “wimp”
and a baby himself. Both he and his wife
expected him to “suck it up” and be
ready to change diapers for his expected
son. Craig’s therapist started by reassuring him that his reactions were completely understandable, and that these
should get less intense with repeated exposure and familiarity with his baby, but
more difficult with continued avoidance. They began a plan of systematic
exposure using a doll to practice changing and wiping, and increasing the
arousal by having his wife place brown
mustard in the doll’s diaper for him to
change. Next, they arranged a visit to the
newborn nursery where Craig watched
through a window as a nurse changed an
infant’s diaper.
In each of these exposure exercises,
Craig noted his level of arousal on a
scale of 0 to 10, how well he tolerated
that arousal, and whether any of his
fears were confirmed or disconfirmed.
Exposure continued after the arrival of
their son, as Craig first watched the
nurse change the baby, and then his
wife change the baby; finally he tried
changing the baby. At first, he changed
the baby with a dry diaper, then a wet
diaper, then a diaper with stool. He
noted that one of his fears was confirmed (the baby might urinate during
changing), but that it was tolerable and
did not create much arousal. He also
realized that the baby sometimes became fussy during changes, but usually
diaper changing helped the baby calm
down, disconfirming another of his
fears. Finally, he found that although
he was uncomfortable with dirty diapers, the discomfort was tolerable and
became less noticeable over time.
Behavioral Rehearsal and Time Management
Behavioral rehearsal involves practicing or role-playing a behavior or sequence
of behavior to improve the client’s confidence and chances of successfully carrying out the behavior in its normal context. Behavioral rehearsal might include practicing a difficult conversation by role-playing with the therapist. Or it
might involve an imagined practice where the client and therapist verbally describe a sequence of actions, as if they were describing an action scene from a
movie or play.
Sandra, in the clinical example of graduated tasks, behaviorally practiced
her hostess skills by imagining and describing specifically what she would do
during her party. Behavioral rehearsal is a particularly useful tool for building
time management skills, and dealing with the complexity of organizing one’s
behavior in the context of real time.
To begin behavioral rehearsal of time management, discussion can start
with either a designated time to be structured (e.g., weekends), or the activities
that need to be planned (e.g., find time to exercise). The first step is to allocate
time for specific actions. It is important to be specific, denoting real times and
clear, observable behaviors (e.g., walk or cycle from 4:00 to 5:00 P.M. on Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday). Even if the planned action actually takes
place at a different time or in a different form (went to the gym at noon because it was raining and I had a break), the listing of specific times increases behavioral orientation toward action and helps the client move out of wishful
thinking and vague imagining. The client’s own personal calendar can be used
to sketch out a plan and monitor its implementation, or the therapist can provide a simple list of times of the day, with space to fill in the actions.
The next step in rehearsing time management is to establish a realistic
transition time between activities. Allocating time between activities for a
transition is much like leaving a margin on a written page, or creating a frame
around a picture. There is a need for some blank space, to allow our senses to
have a stopping point and some brief rest, to demarcate the lines between
when one thing stops, and another begins. All too often, our time margins are
either quickly gobbled up, or entirely neglected in the interest of heightened
productivity or an ambitious agenda. Without a time margin, there is no room
for dealing with unexpected delays, enjoying a lingering moment, or taking
advantage of a spontaneous idea. A situation may be experienced in very different ways, and perhaps have a different impact or outcome, when there is
sufficient ease in time versus pushing the effort right up to the limits in time.
Clients are much more likely to report a sense of mastery when they can
complete things in the time available, instead of not even coming close to
completing a particular agenda or list of activities. This simple situational
change can precipitate fairly significant changes in the qualitative experience
of an activity.
The final step is to rehearse ways to revise the plan of action should that
be needed along the way. Because so often our estimates of needed time are just
that—estimates—it is not uncommon to find ourselves in the midst of an unworkable agenda. Even with good planning and reasonable margins, something
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 305
306 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example
Corey, a 35-year-old sales manager, entered therapy with complaints of
chronic stress, the feeling of being overwhelmed, and difficulty in achieving
personal goals. Although he functioned
reasonably well in the context of his
work, he felt that his greater difficulties
were in the domain of his personal life.
On the weekends in particular, he was
frustrated with his “inability to ever get
anything done.” He had aspirations to
exercise more and get together with
friends for a pickup game of basketball,
and he wanted to enjoy time with his
family, have time to check in on his elderly mother, take care of home maintenance tasks, and occasionally get
away to the lake for some fishing.
Instead, his weekends were consumed by a slew of what seemed to be
unending errands and “who knows
what.” On a recent weekend, as he was
on a trip to the drugstore with his
child, he experienced a panic attack.
This terrified him, as it appeared that
his health was now declining as a result
of his ongoing stress, and he sought
both therapy and medical evaluation.
The medical evaluation revealed no abnormalities, and he was encouraged to
begin a regular program of exercise.
Corey’s therapist suggested that they
take his list of desired activities for the
weekend, and discuss some possible
times to designate for specific endeavors. The pickup basketball game was the
easiest place to start, because there already was a group meeting at a nearby
gym at 2 P.M. on Saturdays. Corey could
either just show up with that group, or
arrange to meet friends for a scrimmage. To effectively make this commitment, however, Corey also had to pick a
designated time for his other important
activities, to insert some margin into his
plan, and practice making revisions
while in action when delays or interruptions occurred. He worked up a
short list of home maintenance and
family activities to take place prior to
the basketball game, with a specific
time to stop and shift his attention toward getting to the gym. He then designated Sunday as a flexday, to include
time for visiting his mother and enjoying recreation such as fishing. His therapist encouraged him to practice working
out a plan on paper, so that he could
best create a situation that allowed time
for each thing. His plan looked like this:
Saturday: Breakfast with family
7:00 A.M. to 8:00 A.M.
Mow grass or wash car
8:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.
Daughter’s soccer & lunch
10:00 A.M. to 12:00 P.M.
Stop at Home Depot after soccer
Fix toilet
12:30 P.M. to 1:30 P.M.
Leave for gym
1:30 P.M.
Basketball
2:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Rehearsing the sequence of actions
and writing it down helped Corey practice organizing his behavior in the context of real time. He became more
successful in getting around to what he
wanted and needed to do. He realized
that thinking about everything without
a plan for designated times was immobilizing him from getting much of anything done.
may significantly alter the original plan. Recognizing this has happened and revising the agenda in the midst of action is all part of effective time management.
Stimulus Control
Specific behaviors become more likely to occur in the presence of certain cues
or prompts. Conversely, they can be weakened or made less likely be altering or
removing the cues. Complex patterns of behaviors typically have a recurring
sequence, or chain of action. Each behavior acts as a cue or trigger for the next
action in the sequence. When change is desired, it can be useful to map out the
currently occurring chain, and plan ways to alter this chain to achieve a different outcome. This can be graphically drawn out on a piece of paper or chalkboard, illustrating the typical chain from a logical starting point, noting possible
and likely points to alter the sequential cues. The net result is response prevention, as a highly likely response is prevented from occurring by altering the
chain of action.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 307
Clinical Example
Brock, a 40-year-old business owner
wanted to decrease the frequency and
amount of his alcohol use and unproductive “screen time” at home in the
evening. After monitoring the baseline
amount of alcohol typically consumed
and time spent on his computer or
watching television, he and his therapist mapped out the typical chain of behaviors that occurred each evening,
beginning when he walked in the door.
First thing, he greeted his dog. Then he
thought about how stressed he felt,
turned on the television, and mixed a
drink. He sat on his sofa, drank the
cocktail and watched the news. When
his glass was empty, he got up and
mixed another drink and returned to
the sofa to watch more TV. After the
second drink was finished, he got up
and microwaved a frozen dinner, ate it,
fed the dog, and then mixed another
drink and went to his computer. He sat
down and read e-mail, sent instant
messages, and surfed chat rooms.
Sometimes he would continue mixing drinks or pouring glasses of wine
and returning to the computer to chat
for several hours, losing count of the
number of drinks or amount of alcohol
consumed. However, the most frequent
behavior chain followed the pattern of
two to four drinks of alcohol, and several hours of screen time. He and his
therapist drew this chain of actions out
on a piece of paper, describing each action in connecting, sequential circles.
With this graphic example to support
their discussion, they reviewed possible
places that he might alter the chain, to
prevent the typical sequence of drinking so much or spending so many hours
in front of a screen.
As part of this plan, Brock specified
measurable behavioral goals: to have
no more than 3 drinks in any one day
and no more than 10 drinks per week
overall, with a target of 0 to 2 drinks
per day and a screen time of no more
than 3 hours of combined computer
(continued)
Behavioral Relaxation
This technique specifically refers to tension reduction in terms of both cognitive activity and muscle tension. Many techniques are available for assisting
clients to reduce muscular tension, and adjust cognitive tension.
The general procedure is to start with adjusting external sensory stimulation by dimming lights, providing a comfortable chair or recliner, adjusting the
temperature, and reducing intrusive noise (and perhaps including a soothing
sound). The client then focuses on physical sensations, particularly breathing,
and is instructed either to simply release tension throughout different parts of
the body (e.g., let the arms relax, let the shoulders relax, let the face relax), or
to tense and then release different muscle groups (see D. Bernstein &
Borkovec, 1973; Otto, Jones, Craske, & Barlow, 1996). Instructions for cognitive tension release typically include allowing thoughts to occur, but refocusing
attention on physical sensations, or simply relaxing and letting thoughts happen without responding or otherwise attending to them. Relaxing or calming
imagery may be included as part of the exercise, creating visualized places that
the client associates with pleasant, relaxed states, such as floating in a pool, sitting by a fountain, lying on a sofa, or swinging in a hammock. This intervention is useful as a general method for improving well-being, as well as for
disrupting dysfunctional states of overall tension.
308 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example (Continued)
and television time. His alternative
plan was to use his evenings more productively for reading, working on his
house, entertaining, or just playing
with his dog.
Brock used behavior monitoring to
keep track of the number of drinks he
consumed each evening, and he rehearsed behavioral changes at very
specific points in the sequence. He decided to greet the dog, and then instead
of mixing the first drink, to take his
dog for a walk and play with him in the
backyard. He also decided to skip
watching the news on a regular basis
before dinner, and to spend more time
actually cooking dinner, something
that he enjoyed. He might choose to
have a glass of wine with his dinner, or
not, but he would postpone having a
mixed drink until after dinner, if he
had one at all.
Over the course of several weeks, he
discussed the challenges and successes
in making these changes in his habitual
evening pattern. This discussion helped
him to rehearse specific, discrete behavior changes as a form of altering
his responses to cues and situations
encountered on a daily basis. Although
the changes may sound relatively
straightforward, considerable effort
and persistence were involved in executing this intervention. However,
Brock significantly reduced his alcohol
consumption, avoided binges of drinking an uncertain quantity of alcohol,
maintained his targeted objective of
moderate alcohol consumption, and increased the quality of his leisure time.
Generalization of Behavior
This intervention involves either prompting or identifying established behaviors
that can be used in new ways, or in new situations for better adaptations. The
focus of the discussion between client and therapist may be on skills, where they
take inventory of the skills used in one situation that may apply to a new or
more challenging situation. This intervention can be particularly useful for
clients who are having some difficulty with a role transition or adjustment.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 309
Clinical Example
Beth was prone to extreme states of
tension and worry. She had obsessive
worries about her health and her
medications, side effects, allergies, and
interactions among the drugs. She worried about what people thought of her,
and about their reactions to her health
problems. In particular, she worried
about her interactions with health care
professionals, which were numerous
and frequent. In her chronic and sometimes extreme state of worry and tension, she would experience increases in
various side effects and allergies, such
as unusual sensations, itching, rashes,
and sensitivity to foods. Her inclination
was then to worry more in an attempt
to figure out what to do about her reactions. Behavioral relaxation helped her
disrupt this spiraling chain of tension
and worry. She experienced a decrease
in her overall rating of experienced tension in the moment by taking 10 to 20
minutes to systematically tense and release her muscles, focus her attention
on breathing, and imagining napping in
a hammock.
Clinical Example
Mary Jo was thinking of dropping out
of nursing school for fear of being unable to complete her required clinical
practice placement some distance from
her home. She was anxious about driving a stretch of road that included interstate travel over a mountainous region.
The time of year increased her chances
of having to drive in rainy weather,
perhaps in the dark if she had to stay
late. She was also worried about being
able to relate to the patients, many of
whom would be elderly. Her therapist
asked her to think about the specific
skills involved in each of these situations, and whether she had any previous experience to build on. She had
driven extensively on the interstates,
once even traveling halfway across
the country. However, the situation of
driving regularly over a mountain,
sometimes in inclement weather or
conditions of darkness was new to her.
So Mary Jo and her therapist discussed in some detail what skills of interstate driving might generalize to this
(continued)
Cognitive Interventions
With cognitive interventions, the therapist and client are delving into the content of specific thoughts to alter the functional impact of those thoughts. Cognitions are frequently altered indirectly through the other interpersonal,
affective, and behavioral forms of intervention. The unique element of a specific cognitive intervention is the explicit focus on automatic thoughts, ideas,
assumptions, attitudes, rules, or beliefs, and the direct efforts to reshape or revise those mental objects.
Through a cognitive intervention, mental objects (automatic thoughts, assumptions, beliefs) may be altered in degree of believability, importance, or
flexibility by additional ideas or contexts that were previously not being used or
given value. Cognitive interventions are not designed to delete or control
thoughts, or to insert “right” thoughts for “wrong” thoughts, but rather to create a greater range of choice and pliability in mental alternatives.
Detect and Evaluate Automatic Thoughts
This intervention is a basic and fundamental cognitive strategy (J. Beck, 1995;
Greenberger & Padesky, 1995). Automatic thoughts are an evaluative part of
our ongoing stream of consciousness, occurring spontaneously but potentially
influenced by the current mood state. Under normal circumstances, such as
when a person is not in distress, there is also an automatic reality testing where
the accuracy or utility of thinking is quickly checked. When this critical examination fails, the person experiences emotional distress, which typically leads to
more negative automatic thoughts.
In this intervention, the therapist helps the client learn about automatic
thinking and how to bring negative automatic thoughts into awareness. To do
this, specific situations need to be pinpointed, where the client can discern a
change or shift in emotions. Then, automatic thoughts are distinguished from
310 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example (Continued)
new situation, and what additional
skills she might need. She also recognized that darkness and wet weather
were not new conditions, and that she
already had specific skills that could
generalize to a new situation of driving
over a mountain, such as slowing down
in the rain, looking for the outer white
line to follow the road in reduced visibility, not braking suddenly if possible,
and staying in her lane except to pass.
As for relating to her elderly patients, they discussed what experience
she had in relating to elderly people
that she could apply to this new clinical
context. Mary Jo recalled spending
summers with her grandmother, enjoying her interactions with grandmother’s
card-playing group, all of whom were
older people, and family gatherings
with her mother’s family, where six or
more older persons often were present.
This helped her realize that she had
some skills in making small talk or conversation with older persons, and that
she knew how to take an interest in
people, both skills that could generalize
to her placement experience.
both situations, and emotions. The degree of emotion is typically rated on a
subjective scale, such as from 0 to 100, to help the client have greater discrimination of degrees of difference, and to identify the more emotionally provocative automatic thoughts.
The next step in the intervention is to prompt reality checking of the automatic thoughts by using a series of questions or probes that focus on the evidence to verify the thought, the alternative interpretations available, or the
implications to be addressed if the thought contains some truth (see J. Beck,
1995). Cognitive therapists often use a written illustration as they work
through this exercise, using a piece of paper or a whiteboard. In sequential
columns, the basic information is listed: situation, emotions, automatic
thoughts, and the constructed response, which will either be reformulated cognitions or a coping action plan. Emotions that are subsequent to the constructed response may also be listed, to illustrate for the client how their
emotions are affected by cognitive perspective.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 311
Clinical Example
Debra was feeling depressed and
lonely, so she decided to phone a close
friend whom she had not seen in a
while. During their brief conversation,
she detected a detached tone in the
friend’s voice, and she thought she
could hear the tapping of a keyboard
in the background, as if her friend was
working on her computer during their
conversation. After hanging up the
phone, she felt more sad, lonely, and
miserable than ever. Her automatic
thought record looked like this:
Situation Emotion
Automatic
Thoughts
Coping
Response Emotions
Conversation
with Ella
Sad—80
Lonely—99
Miserable—90
Ella didn’t even want to
bother talking to me. She
must not like me anymore. I have no friends.
I’m a loser and a reject.
I never asked if it was a
bad time for her. Maybe
she had a work deadline.
Just because she was distracted does not mean
that she is no longer my
friend. We’ve been friends
for a long time, and I do
still have other friends. I
can try calling her again
at a better time or maybe
send her an email.
Lonely—60
Hopeful—40
Guided Discovery
Guided discovery involves asking a series of questions in a Socratic style dialogue, to draw out intermediate beliefs or those conditional rules and assumptions that arise from and reinforce distorted core beliefs about the self, others,
and the future. Such assumptions and rules form a web of emotionally charged
cognitions that guide and direct the person’s behavior. These cognitions can be
addressed with the same methods of critical reality testing that are used for automatic thoughts. To do this, the client first must detect the belief and bring it
more fully into conscious awareness, including exploration of the emotions and
behavioral responses that are tied to the rule or assumption. This process of
questioning and exploring provides some important reality testing as such rules
typically operate as a “given,” “just the way things are,” or “the way I was
raised.” This typifies the cognitive rigidity and lack of alternative ideas that the
intervention is designed to address.
312 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example
Debra and her therapist had the following guided discovery dialogue about
friendship.
Therapist: Debra, you were clearly distressed by this experience of Ella
sounding detached when you phoned
her. I’d like to explore further some
of the associations your mind makes
to such a situation. For example,
how would you complete the following thought: If a friend is distracted
when I call, then . . .
Debra: She isn’t really there for me.
Therapist: So if someone is a friend, then
they will always be there for you?
Debra: Yes.
Therapist: And is the reverse also true
for you, that if someone isn’t there
for you, that means they are not a
friend?
Debra: I guess so.
Therapist: Is this rule an absolute one,
or are there any exceptions? Could
someone have one or two “strikes”
and still be your friend?
Debra: Well, I suppose so, but I don’t
like it.
Therapist: Have there ever been times
that you were not able to be there
for a friend, but you still felt very
committed to the friendship, and
were able to be there at some point
in the future?
Debra: Oh, never, I’m always a “perfect” friend (laughs). No, really, I see
what you’re getting at. Maybe my
rules for friendship don’t have to be
so strict.
Downward Arrow
This technique follows one particular thought with successive questions about
the attached meaning. By following a trail of associated meaning, the client can
articulate global conclusions that are reference points in the schema for self,
others, and the future. These are the core beliefs that are highly believable,
salient, and persistent over time. The downward arrow exercise helps bring the
idea into the client’s awareness in a verbal form that can be further discussed
and modified.
Generate Options and Alternatives
The client’s upsetting thoughts may be related to situations or circumstances
that are true or unchangeable. The distress is not a function of the client’s distorted view of reality, but rather a constricted view of the possible options for
coping. The client and therapist work together to brainstorm a list of possible
choices, or ideas to try to make a difficult situation more workable. To the extent that the client lacks skills or experience, the options should include a skillbuilding component.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 313
Clinical Example
Bill reported having anxious and depressed feelings after eating lunch with
his coworkers in the office cafeteria.
The topic of conversation had been a
variety of hobbies, and Bill saw his colleagues as being vastly more accomplished than he was. The downward
arrow conversation went as follows:
Bill: I can barely cover my bases on the
job and these guys all excel at work
and accomplish something in their
hobby as well.
Therapist: What do you think that
means?
Bill: They are better than me.
Therapist: Better than you in terms
of . . . ?
Bill: Being a competent human being.
Therapist: If that were true, and I’m not
buying that it is, but if that were
true, what would that mean?
Bill: That I am incompetent and defective.
Therapist: So when you are around
highly competent coworkers, how
much do you believe that you are incompetent and defective?
Bill: Just about 100%.
Therapist: And if it is 100% true that
you are incompetent and defective,
what does that mean?
Bill: I am ultimately a weak person.
Therapist: And does that mean anything
else?
Bill: That I am unlovable and unworthy
of associating with strong people.
Clinical Example
In the previous example of Debra, who
was upset about her friend’s distraction, the therapist helped her generate
some ideas about ways she could respond to this situation. Together, they
made a list of possible options for her to
consider. The list looked something like
this:
• Do nothing. Our friendship has room
for her to be distracted.
• See how things go when we get together next and then decide.
• Call her and vent my feelings.
• Call her and schedule a time to discuss our needs and feelings about
our friendship.
(continued)
Scale on a Continuum
The problem at hand often feels like the worst problem ever because the proximal demands and the level of arousal activate extreme appraisals. Emotional reactions to having the problem can magnify the negative aspects of it, much like
a pebble in one’s shoe can feel like a boulder after a very short distance. This is
especially true if the circumstances are highly salient to self-esteem and the
client has little confidence in being able to cope. Scaling on a continuum recasts
the perspective on the problem; this shrinks back the intensified distress and
decreases the meaning or importance ascribed to a single action or situation.
314 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example (Continued)
• Call her to make some plans, but
don’t specifically bring anything up,
just have a friendly contact.
• Write a “Dear Jane” letter to tell her
how angry I am.
• Drop her as a friend. Don’t call or
write, and refuse to answer her correspondence.
Each of these options was discussed
for its possible workability and likely result. Debra decided that she wanted to
try calling Ella to schedule a time for
discussing their mutual needs and feelings about the friendship. She felt this
was most in keeping with her value of
being a loyal friend herself. However,
she was also uncomfortable because she
had little experience with such direct
communication. She was afraid that she
would bungle the conversation or provoke Ella’s anger. So her natural tendency was to avoid confrontation. Thus,
Debra needed assistance in practicing assertive communication skills to help her
overcome the avoidance barrier.
Clinical Example
Shirley made a special effort to prepare a
“healthy” birthday treat for her daughter’s first-grade class. When she checked
back in the afternoon, the snacks were
mostly untouched and the teacher told
her that the children had not been interested in a snack that day. Shirley then
felt “horribly embarrassed,” as if she
could never show her face again at the
school. She was convinced this was a
failure at being a mother.
Prior to using the willingness exercise
described above, Shirley’s therapist used
the cognitive scaling exercise to help her
reduce the intensity of her embarrassment. The therapist asked her to make a
continuum of possible motherhood failures, with a degree of importance attached from 0 to 100% (see the figure
following). They brainstormed a list of
possible failures, from minor importance to major importance by Shirley’s
estimation. The list included failure to
wake your child up on time for school
(25%), failure to check your child’s
homework (40%), failure to check with 
Redirect Attention
When anticipating a challenging activity that provokes some discomfort, the
cognitive response often deteriorates into fruitless rumination. Rather than
evaluating the truthfulness or usefulness of these thoughts, a somewhat different tactic is used. It is already evident that the thoughts are not useful, and
there is little or no dispute of the accuracy of the observations.
Instead, the stream of consciousness produces avoidance behavior, sometimes identified by clients as “procrastination.” It is clear that some important
task or activity is not getting done, and this in turn is creating tension and
worry; and perhaps very real negative consequences are looming. This intervention instructs the client to recognize the unproductive nature of the
thoughts, and redirects attention toward more productive tasks. Tic-Toc is an
acronym for “task-interfering cognitions,” and “task-orienting cognitions”
(Burns, 1989). By labeling the ruminations that accompany procrastination as
“task-interfering,” the debate can be curtailed, and the focus of energy shifted
more directly toward “task-orienting” thoughts.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 315
Clinical Example
a doctor when your child is ill (70% or
worse), failure to know your child’s
whereabouts (90%), failure to protect
your child from known dangers or
threats such as poisons (99%) and failure to love your child as 100%. In the
context of this continuum, the disturbing situation of the failure of her snack
to delight the class seemed much
smaller and less important, rating in the
end, only 15%.
Unpopular
snack
Neglect
homework
Overlook
illness
Fail to
love
0 15 30 45 60 75 90 100
Shirley’s continuum of possible motherhood failures
Clinical Example
Moritza, a high school senior, kept
putting off the work of completing college applications. She would sit down
at her computer and think, “I don’t
know where to start. There’s too much
to do. I can do it later. I don’t feel like
doing it now. Besides, I don’t know
where I want to go to college, or if I
will be accepted.” It was no surprise
that she typically would find something else to do instead of working on
the applications. However, her parents
and school counselor were beginning
to come up with more nagging questions about her progress, which further made her think “Everyone is
getting mad at me. I’m probably not
college material.”
(continued)
Assign a Realistic Probability
Once an idea or a possibility is present in our mind, emotions often follow the
possibility, even if it is extremely remote or unlikely. If you think of a terrible
catastrophe, you are likely to feel some sadness and anxiety at the mere thought
or image. This reaction may then build in a cumulative fashion, much like an
avalanche cascading down a mountain, getting larger and larger as more catastrophic thoughts and images are easily brought to mind.
Stopping this avalanche may take a systematic effort of assigning realistic
probabilities to the ideas and images. Sometimes just stopping to think about
316 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clinical Example (Continued)
Moritza’s therapist explained that
there was an important and specific
task at hand, and it appeared that
Moritza was having a lot of TICs when
she needed more TOCs. This aroused
her curiosity, and the therapist explained that TOCs were “task orienting
cognitions,” or thoughts that would
help her get focused and directed on actually getting something done. TICs
only interfered with her getting the
task done. So her therapist offered
some examples of TOCs, including “I
can start anywhere, it’s okay, just as
long as I get started. It will be simple to
just fill out the name and address parts.
If I run into a snag, the counselor or my
mom will help me. I need to get started
now, even though I don’t feel like it.
And I won’t know where I can go until
I apply and get accepted. The first thing
to do is just open the file with the application form and start filling in the
blanks.”
Clinical Example
Alice developed a fear of being bitten
by a dog after she was randomly bitten
by a pet walking with his owners. Her
experience told her that being bitten
was possible, and now every dog she
saw carried the potential to harm her.
The notion of experience salience was
explained to Alice (having had an experience leads us to think it is likely to
happen again). Then she was asked to
place this experience in a context of realistic probability.
As homework, Alice gathered more
information from dog-training experts
and learned that many factors can increase or decrease the probability of a
dog biting her. These could include the
dog’s breed, the dog’s history of care
(which would likely be unknown to
her), as well as the dog’s behavior at the
time of contact with her, and the place
of contact (whether she was in the
dog’s “territory”). Signals such as
growling, staring, flattening of the ears
and fierce barking would typically precede more aggressive behavior. Any
and all of these factors could help her
determine a realistic probability of a
dog being aggressive toward her, and
help her to plan an appropriate response rather than simply guarding
herself against any contact with dogs
whatsoever.
the realistic probability will easily bring the concept of remoteness to mind, and
help the person realize the minimal likelihood of the apprehension. Other
times, specific testing of ideas or gathering of information is needed to create a
semblance of a realistic probability. If the client does not immediately have a
sense of realistic probability, then further information may be needed to form
a realistic judgment.
Conduct a Survey
A useful way to introduce flexibility into the client’s thinking is to encourage
informal surveys of the thoughts, beliefs, and practices of others. This can help
the client reduce a fear (e.g., “would you laugh and ridicule someone who
passed out in public?”), gain greater confidence in their own convictions (e.g.,
“would you disapprove of a 14-year-old being allowed to smoke pot?”), or normalize common reactions (“do you ever worry about doing well enough at
your job?”).
It is important to discuss who will be the respondents to the survey, as this
will provide a context for the information gathered. For example, a drug dealer
just might approve of the 14-year-old smoking pot. Gathering information,
considering the sources, and deciding whether to revise one’s own beliefs on
the basis of this information are the essential ingredients for increasing flexibility and ability to think critically about one’s perceptions and beliefs.
Therapeutic Methods: Building Psychotherapy Skills 317
Clinical Example
Fritz, an assistant professor, was discouraged and embarrassed that his first
submission of a research grant request
had been rejected. This provoked significant doubts about his ability to succeed in his chosen field, and he began
ruminating about ending up as a barista
at the coffee shop. Conducting a survey
on the typical frequency of this sort of
outcome among colleagues in his current department felt too threatening to
him, but he was willing to contact some
of his mentors to inquire about their
early career experiences. He was surprised to learn that virtually all of them
considered this “par for the course,”
and thought that he had understood
this because it was so common. About
this time, he also attended a national
conference where there was a panel
discussion on early career development, and inquiry of the conference
panelists revealed the same response—
with only one exception, everyone else
had the same experience.
Summary
Effective therapists do many different things, and have many tools at their disposal as the preceding examples show. One thing that we hope they will all do
is remain sensitive to the needs of the client and choose wisely from the vast
array of technical interventions. Having a broad repertoire of technical skills
from which to select options is an important foundation for competent clinical
practice (see Table 11.1).
318
Table 11.1 Common Clinical Procedures
Interpersonal and System Interventions
Family and cultural history: Summarize the members and cultural affiliations of the family. Major
events and the impact of any secrets can be assessed, as well as learned rules and patterns of
behavior. Develop a realistic picture of strengths and limitations.
Interpersonal developmental time line: Review personal developmental history to refine global
self-perceptions of interpersonal skills and experiences.
Current interpersonal inventory: Note the network of current relationships with relevant dimensions such as degree of intimacy, frequency of communication, power and control, and connections to group affiliations.
Roles and role transitions: Spotlight the psychosocial roles of the client and the associated expectations, demands, and opportunities, and explore any transitions between roles or changes within
a role.
Routines and rituals: Encourage individual and group routines and special rituals, often culturally sanctioned, to induce organization and stability, and provide opportunity for emotional
expression.
Assertive communication skills: Practice when and how to express personal thoughts and feelings
to maintain effective and respectful interpersonal relationships.
Family and collateral meetings: Designate group meeting to facilitate communication and effective
role functioning for members of a system. Discussion might include exchange of information;
assessment of primary concerns and progress issues; expression of feelings; and efforts to resolve
specific problems, conflicts, or current stresses.
Balance autonomy and affiliation: Review adaptive choices to meet individual needs for autonomy and involvement in relationships, groups, and communities.
Affective Interventions
Mindfulness practice: Focus awareness on internal components of experience and observation
without judgment or change.
Emotional deepening and validation: Attend, label, and explore emotions in a context of interpersonal understanding and acceptance.
Interoceptive exposure: Activate uncomfortable body sensations systematically to reduce avoidance
and fear, produce habituation, and detect associated cognitions.
Willingness exercises: Release control attempts over emotional components of an experience to facilitate functional behavior.
Values assessment: Detect emotional investment in broad life objectives.
Metaphors: Describe vivid images that illustrate concepts of change in a memorable and emotionally nonthreatening way.
Imagery replacement: Construct pleasant images to prompt positive affect and more functional
coping response.
Expressive monologue: Facilitate articulation of thoughts and feelings in relationship to past events
or absent persons.
319
Table 11.1 (Continued)
Behavioral Interventions
Define target behavior and monitor baseline: Translate abstract intentions such as being happier or
more confident into an operational definition of specific target behaviors that are relevant and
meaningful. Track or monitor frequency and details of a target behavior or class of behavior prior
to any specific attempts to change.
Activities for mastery and pleasure: Schedule activities to provide general activation and increase
likelihood of contact with positive experiences such as pleasure or mastery. Increase understanding of the relationship between mood and behavior.
Graduated tasks: Break a complex activity into manageable components.
Systematic exposure: Confront an avoided, feared stimulus through repeated contact of increasing
proximity or intensity.
Behavioral rehearsal and time management: Practice specific steps as a successive approximation
toward desired skill or outcome. Apply the rehearsal of behavior in a real-time context.
Stimulus control: Increase or decrease the likelihood of a behavior or sequence of behavior by
altering associated cues.
Behavioral relaxation: Use systematic tension reduction to disrupt and reduce physical and
mental stress.
Generalization of behavior: Transport an established behavior or skill into a new or more challenging situation.
Cognitive Interventions
Detect automatic thoughts and evaluate the evidence: Increase awareness and reality checking of
spontaneous cognitions, especially evaluative thoughts.
Guided discovery: Ask a series of questions to draw out a collection of intermediate beliefs or
conditional rules that reinforce distorted core beliefs.
Downward arrow: Ask a series of questions to trace a specific thought back to a distorted core
belief.
Generate options and alternatives: Brainstorm a range of possibilities for coping or construing a
problem to reduce tension, increase flexibility, and foster hope.
Scale on a continuum: Recast perspective on a problem by placing in a context such as a scale of
0% to 100%.
Redirect attention: Label rumination as unproductive thought and redirect or orient the focus of
cognitive attention toward a productive task.
Assign realistic probability: Reality check predictions against actual possibility and gather further
information if needed.
Conduct a survey: Assess potential social consensus for a perception or belief.


Understanding, Facilitating, and
Evaluating Change
The overall purpose of any therapeutic intervention is to foster change that
improves the client’s life in some way. To accomplish this purpose, the clinician must understand the complexities of bringing about change, how to
track and measure change, how to communicate key information about change
as it is happening, and how to maintain change over time.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Recognize four principles of therapeutic change based on the general
principle of patient autonomy.
• Understand motivation to change as a process involving identifiable
stages.
• Recognize clinical indications of five established stages and five proposed
stages in the process of change.
• Explain key barriers to measuring change and practical strategies for overcoming them.
• Discern professionally sound ways to communicate about change with patients, care managers, and other involved parties.
Think for a moment about a personal change that you have attempted
some time in your life. Perhaps you decided to lose weight or to improve your
physical fitness, your social life, your academic performance, or the tidiness of
your personal space. What motivated you to attempt this change? Did you


achieve your desired results? What sort of steps did you take to accomplish
your goals? How much energy and effort did the change require? Did you go
through repeated attempts to change? How did you measure or evaluate your
changes? Did others notice the change? Could you maintain the change over
time? If you did not achieve the results you wanted (maybe you are still trying),
what do you think stood in your way?
The most substantive part of therapy is the middle part, where the bulk of
the work of change takes place. This is sometimes referred to as the “working
through” phase of therapy. The ideas and goals that have been established in
the treatment plan are now pursued in a systematic fashion and progress is
made. Objectives for this phase of therapeutic intervention include keeping the
treatment focused, incorporating new information as it becomes available, eliciting productive change, evaluating progress, and communicating effectively
with all relevant parties. Tools that help therapists effectively navigate the middle phase of treatment include an awareness of principles and stages of change,
understanding the processes that are relevant to each stage of change, and
knowing ways to adjust interventions to the stage of change. Efficient interventions, whether they are brief or extended, depend on doing the right things at
the right time and involving the right people and circumstances to support the
process of change (Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross, 1992). Clinicians will
also find it important to apply their assessment skills to measure change as the
patient progresses through therapy. In addition, ongoing communications
about change are an important part of the substantive work of therapy.
Understanding Change
Many patients come to therapy in pain from intrapsychic or interpersonal problems. They want relief as quickly as possible. These patients (and often their
therapist) see the need and the possibility for the psychotherapeutic collaboration to immediately move toward change. This is especially true in the “shortterm” or “time-limited” therapies as opposed to traditional long-term therapies.
In the brief therapy models, the pressure of time limits often compel the therapist to use a more technical-mechanical approach to try to quickly move patients to change before the necessary base for change has been built. The
therapist may, in effect, try to have patients run before they have learned to
crawl and walk. Realistic expectations reflect an appreciation of the complexity
of change as a process. Occasionally, change takes place in a fast and direct
fashion. More often, change is circuitous, following a path of starts and interruptions, new problems, redirections, and unanticipated challenges (Prochaska
& Norcross, 2003). Rather than being a discrete occurrence, change happens
through both internal and external events accruing over time. How much time
is needed will depend on the patient, the nature of the problems and the resources that are available to support and encourage the desired changes.
The tools of collaboration discussed in Chapter 10 are directly related to
the process of change. Here we discuss specific tools related to change that enable the therapist to effectively manage the collaborative relationship and the
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 323
therapeutic endeavor. As the consulting professional, a therapist can reasonably
be expected to have a good understanding of how change usually occurs, and
can facilitate the patient’s understanding of change as a process that may not be
linear or simple to execute. Even when rapport and general understanding between patient and therapist are excellent, a lack of understanding of change or
miscommunications about change can foil the productivity of the therapy. An
effective understanding of change processes enables the clinician to keep therapy moving along in a beneficial direction.
The Principles of Change
The first tool for successfully navigating the change process is to understand
that there are certain principles of therapeutic change (Kleinke, 1994). These
include the assertions that (1) the patient is the agent of change; (2) the agent
(patient) determines the pace of change; (3) action is required for change to
occur; (4) change involves emotional risk.
The Patient Is the Agent of Change
Beginning therapists, and some experienced hands as well, may approach an
intervention by thinking of the changes they will “get” their patient to make.
The therapist has a direct plan in mind and, sleeves rolled up, is ready to get
going. The therapist sees a need to “make” the patient be more flexible, to
make more effort at work, to confront anxiety-provoking situations, or enjoy
more of life. The treatment plan may be sound in terms of overall goals and
objectives, yet flawed in terms of identifying the agent of change. By thinking
of what the patient must be persuaded to do, the therapist is reaching over a
boundary and taking on the role of agent of change. In a sense, the effort of
the therapist and the patient’s behavior are viewed in a way that fuses the responsibility for action. This can create an unhelpful struggle for control of
whatever change will or should occur. Often, such a control struggle will lead
to frustration for one or both parties, and the therapeutic collaboration can
suffer or disintegrate. Therapists may believe that their competence and reputation are at stake if patients cannot be “gotten” to make expected changes in
a timely manner.
This potential control struggle can be averted by recognizing that the patient is the agent of change, and the therapist is the agent of facilitation, encouragement, and support. Any change that happens will be a function of the
patient’s doing. The choice to take action belongs to the patient, even if therapists do not fully appreciate this reality. Recognizing the patient’s ultimate
agency in the change process can open up many more possibilities for helping
the patient align wishes, intentions, and actions. Just because the patient is the
agent of change does not mean that he or she is immediately ready to take action, that action will be easy, or that change will occur if the therapist works
hard enough. In helping the patient to become a more effective agent of change,
the therapist may address several issues, including setting functional expectations for what or who can change, progressing through stages of change, developing a sensitivity to small increments of change, and clarifying boundaries
with others concerning desired or expected changes.
324 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Both patients and therapists may hold implicit assumptions about the
therapist being the primary agent of change, thus compromising patients’
agency in their own lives. These patients may have a long history of struggling
with change and feel ineffective or incapable as their own agents. Such demoralization makes it even more likely that patients will struggle with directive efforts offered by therapists. Patients who are longing for relief from struggle seek
strong therapists who offer the latest, most powerful technology. At the same
time, these patients may remain in a passive mode, waiting for things to somehow change as a function of going to therapy or taking medication, or seeking a
perfect intellectual understanding that will circumvent the potential for failed
efforts. Commitment to the autonomy of patients and understanding of change
processes and relevant techniques for facilitating movement toward change can
keep the therapy focused in relevant ways, and help patients tap their internal
capacity for change.
The Patient Determines the Pace of Change
It may be safe to assume that most if not all patients would prefer quick results.
Can you imagine anyone really preferring the alternative of delayed or slow results, if a choice is possible? However, it is not safe to assume that most patients
are ready or able to change at a rapid pace. Some can change quickly, some not.
This pace is determined by a number of factors, the largest being the patient
him or herself. As much as 55% of the patient’s improvement in psychotherapy
may be attributable to aspects particular to the patient such as his or her expectations, prior skills, and life circumstances (Lambert & Barley, 2002). The therapist can most influence the patient’s pace by facilitating progress through the
identifiable stages of change to be discussed.
Historically, it has been assumed that no patient could quickly change and
that rapid change could only represent a superficial and incomplete resolution
of underlying conflicts. Accelerated results were merely a transitory illusion of
change that would soon be followed by new symptoms, commonly referred to
as “symptom substitution.” If depressed patients experienced a notable mood
shift in a positive direction early in treatment, the symptom substitution theory
predicted that they would soon develop new problems, perhaps compulsive
eating or panic attacks. The new problems developed because underlying conflicts had not yet had time to be discovered and resolved; thus the patients
lacked true readiness to change. New or substitute symptoms were still needed
to express the unresolved conflict. We now have evidence that many forms of
brief, focused therapy provide effective symptom remission and sustained effects over time (Chambless et al., 1998).
It is risky to overgeneralize the positive results of brief interventions to assume that anyone can quickly execute significant changes. The notable benefits
obtained in studies of short-term interventions may contribute to an assumption that is probably just as faulty as inevitable symptom substitution. This opposing assumption is that all change will occur rapidly, and that anything
beyond very brief therapy is unnecessary. Both assumptions impose a time
frame on the patient, and do not account for the patient’s agency in setting the
pace of change, as well as differential readiness for the action of change and
complexity of the overall change needed.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 325
The challenge is to more precisely discern what factors most influence
the pace of change in therapy. We have some basic understanding of which
patient factors facilitate or impede the pace of change. Factors associated with
positive change include an active involvement in the treatment process, a
positive expectation for change through therapy, and social support for the
desired change. Factors that may impede change include the severity and
chronicity of the problems, lack of social support, the presence of secondary
gain or benefits associated with the symptoms, hopelessness or pessimism
about the possibility of change, and a passive or disengaged attitude about the
process of change.
Action Is Required for Change to Occur
In many areas of health care, being a patient means following the directions of
an authoritative caregiver. When the treatment objective is something concrete,
such as the removal of a tumor, the provider gives explicit instructions for the
preparations that the patient is expected to make (e.g., must arrive on time for
a scheduled surgery having restricted all intakes of food and fluids for a prescribed period). At this point, the professionals take over the action of change
and expertly administer the necessary medications and procedures. The patient
cooperates and consents to the procedures, but may even be unconscious during most of this treatment. When the procedure is complete, the patient must
resume an active role of attending to the matters of physical recovery.
Psychotherapy is a different sort of service, as the patient, being the
agent of change, is the one who needs to take charge of the action for any
change to occur. Just showing up physically for therapy is an important part
of the process, but alone this action is not likely to cause any notable change.
Defining the action that must take place is a bit of a challenge. Just talking or
developing insights does not necessarily lead to behavior change (Kleinke,
1994; Yalom, 1980). At the same time, just executing some action may not
produce needed or lasting change either. Doing things randomly and reactively
may be a fundamental part of the problem. Sometimes the change needed is a
reduction in harmful actions, such as cutting, purging, or using drugs. Here
the action needed is not just to “do something,” but to learn a more subtle
process of responding differently to internal states and perhaps better mastering the impulse to action. Changes in verbal behavior are often an important
part of this change, as patients move away from reciting reasons for maladaptive behavior and toward discussion of alternatives, priorities, and direction of
action. The changes in verbal behavior then pave the way toward strategic
choices in actions.
Change Involves Emotional Risk
What if you encourage a patient to embrace the challenge of change, and his
fears are confirmed? What if you role-play to the best of your ability the skills
of assertive communication and instead of getting the requested raise, the patient gets fired from his job? What happens if you encourage the shy coed to go
out for sorority rush, and she finds herself shunned? What if your patient finally gives up drinking and discovers a deep unhappiness with most aspects of
his life?
326 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
It may be that both patient and therapist expect effective treatment to prevent any undesirable feelings or events. This reflects an underlying assumption
that the purpose of therapy is to master or control emotions and situations. The
mastery approach maintains that if the patient is sufficiently rehearsed in the
winning strategies, potentially difficult experiences will not happen. Yes, we all
want our patients to get positive results, and we will help them acquire the
needed skills and make calculated judgments in what they attempt. But we
cannot control outcomes, and we especially cannot control the emotional experience that will take place as the patient undertakes new experiences. The assumption of this latter approach is that of a coping model for therapy. Under this
model, the purpose of therapy is to expand the patient’s range of coping with
difficult emotions or situations, and to make purposeful choices.
The risk associated with change appears to be the risk of having to experience negative emotions such as embarrassment, anxiety, disappointment, or
the stress of inadequately developed skills. Old problems may have developed
as a compensation for even older problems, and when the former is removed,
the latter may be revealed. Emotions encountered within the process of change
may not all be as wonderful as the thrill of success.
Many people assume that the emotional risks of change constitute a negative experience, characterized as painful, frightening, and requiring great
courage (Kleinke, 1994). A broader assumption is at work here, the assumption
that experiencing a range of emotions is inherently an adverse event. At least
some of the emotional risk associated with change may be the threat of unwanted emotions, thoughts, or outcomes. Emphasizing the aversive quality of
consequences that may in fact be uncontrollable usually leads to control efforts, including impulsive or avoidant behaviors. Change involves the risk of
encountering different feelings and experiences, and that is precisely why
change is sought. This risk does not have to be labeled as “bad” even if it is uncomfortable or taxing. A person might feel frustrated, discouraged, or uncertain and yet not consider any of these emotions as particularly painful or
frightening. Our therapy strategies can teach patients that it is possible to manage and redefine such risk in the pursuit of important goals. Coping well often
means understanding, accepting, and managing a full spectrum of emotions.
A sports analogy illustrates this willingness to risk a range of thoughts,
emotions, and experiences. Although all athletes would rather win than lose, no
athlete has risen to the top of his or her sport by being unwilling to take the risk
of losing. The player does not choose to play the game to feel frustrated with personal limits, embarrassed over mistakes, tired and anxious about tedious practice, or disappointed in losing to a rival team, but is willing to risk all these in the
pursuit of higher performance. There is risk of emotional, cognitive, and physical
discomfort, yet it is understood as a functional part of a desired objective.
Motivation and Stages of Change
There is an old joke that asks, “How many therapists does it take to change a
lightbulb?” The answer is, “Only one, but the lightbulb has to want to change.”
In this section, we discuss the dimensional aspects of patient motivation within
the construct of progressive stages of change. Whether short-term or timeunlimited, therapy occurs in a series of developmental stages. These stages, like
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 327
life, are regular, identifiable, and predictable. For some patients change can be
implemented more quickly than for other patients. For some patients there
needs to be a greater focus in the therapy on the preparation for change before
the change can occur.
The issue of motivation to change has long been recognized as crucial to
successful therapy. Some highly motivated patients embrace change more
quickly than other patients do and are apt to have a successful therapy experience. For other patients, change seems to progress at a glacial pace, if it happens
at all, and their motivation appears to be low. The question of what precise factors mediate this varying level of motivation has hovered in the field of intervention for decades. However, a simple motivational continuum from low to high
has yielded little in the way of understanding how patient motivation works.
An alternative approach that conceptualizes patient motivation to change
as a process with identifiable stages has been gaining scientific support over the
past few decades. The application of a stage concept to the process of change has
had a tremendous impact on our understanding of this crucial variable. Most
well known in the area of stages-of-change is the work of Prochaska and DiClemente (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1982, 1983, 1985, 1992; Prochaska et al.,
1992). Originally derived from empirical research with patients in smokingcessation treatment, this transtheoretical model has shown tremendous usefulness in understanding the process of change among patients dealing with addictions and other problematic behaviors. Variations of Prochaska and DiClemente’s
model can also be found in the writings of Brownell, Marlatt, Lichtenstein, and
Wilson (1986), Dryden (1986), and Marlatt and Gordon (1985). There are five
stages in the Prochaska et al. (1992) model of motivation to change: (1) precontemplation; (2) contemplation; (3) preparation; (4) action; and (5) maintenance.
Freeman and Dolan (2001) have expanded on the Prochaska and DiClemente model with an additional five stages that detail important clinical
challenges that may be encountered in the precontemplation and maintenance
stages (see Table 12.1). In breaking down the earlier stages, Freeman and
Table 12.1 Expanded Stages of Change
Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross Freeman & Dolan
— Noncontemplation
— Anticontemplation
Precontemplation Precontemplation
Contemplation Contemplation
Preparation Action planning
Action Action
— Prelapse (Redirection)
— Lapse (Redirection)
— Relapse (Redirection)
Maintenance Maintenance
Source: “Revisiting Prochaska and DiClemente’s Stages of Change Theory: An Expansion and Specification to Aid in Treatment Planning and Outcome Evaluation,”
by A. Freeman and M. Dolan, 2001, Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 8, 224–234.
Reprinted with permission.
328 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Dolan’s expansion articulates different cognitive perspectives that may precede
attempts to change, each requiring a different therapeutic response. Similarly,
the failure to sustain change can be broken down into distinct stages and dealt
with according to the specific issues. Armed with this detailed perspective, the
therapist can more precisely assess the patient’s progress in developing the necessary motivation to move through the stages of change. Progress does not typically occur in a finite and direct path. The change process is more of a spiral
through the stages than a straight line toward a cure. Each of these stages may
be visited repeatedly throughout therapy, perhaps even in a single session.
However, not every patient will experience every stage of the expanded version
of the stages of change. For example, not everyone will progress through anticontemplation or relapse.
Noncontemplation
Noncontemplation is the stage of change in which an individual is not considering or even thinking about changing. Those in noncontemplation seem oblivious to a need to change, the effect that their behavior has on others, or the fact
that their global level of functioning is considerably less than it might be if they
were more attentive or cognizant of the need to change. Noncontemplators
simply do not make a connection between their behavior and a negative situation until it is pointed out to them. They are, in a word, clueless.
Patients at this point are not actively avoiding, resisting, or opposing
change. They simply have not considered it, and may be willing to work on
change when it is made manifest or obvious by the therapist. The key statements by the patient are “I didn’t realize that I need to change.” In the noncontemplative stage, patients may enter treatment because of a circumstantial
issue and not necessarily for personal reasons. They may or may not be willing
to consider or think about their own problems, depending on the perceived relevance to the presenting concern.
Case Example
Brenda brought her 11-year-old daughter to a school performance clinic for
evaluation of excessive anxiety related
to homework and tests. As part of the
assessment, Brenda was asked about
how she assisted her child with homework. She reported a lengthy and detailed approach of carefully monitoring
all assignments, sitting beside her child
to actively participate in the completion
of “our” homework, drilling her child
in areas of perceived weakness, coaching her with extensive lectures on the
importance of academic achievement,
and providing workbooks for supplemental practice to assist her daughter
in excelling to her highest level. Brenda
believed her own behavior was part of
a solution, and never thought of it as
part of the problem until it was suggested that perhaps she might consider
whether some of these actions induced
the child’s anxiety.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 329
Anticontemplation
Anticontemplation is an active process of distinct opposition to the idea of personal change where problems are adamantly attributed to external sources. The
emotional tone of this process may vary, from outright hostility or aggressively
righteous indignation to smug condescension. Whatever the emotional tone,
the essence of this response is a strong reaction to the notion of a need for personal change. Either overtly or covertly, the patient tells the messenger, “Screw
you! I do not need or want to change.”
Those who try to reason with the anticontemplator or to tell him about
the impact of his behavior will be told, “You’re crazy; You’re overreacting; It’s
really your problem, not mine. You’re imagining things, as no one else thinks
this is a problem.” Much time may be spent in complaining about unfairness
and others who are really to blame for any obvious problems. Individuals who
enter therapy in this stage are most often there due to duress, mandated by the
court or pushed into therapy by family or significant others. They will typically
spend the therapy time soliciting validation of their perspective, blaming others,
or otherwise complaining about their unfortunate circumstances.
Case Example—Claire
When 15-year-old Claire came for
therapy for a depressed mood, she reported, among other problems, significant conflict with her mother. Her
mother was invited to attend the next
session. The mother immediately took
control and opened the session by emphatically stating “I am NOT the one
who needs to change, and I have no intention of changing. I am the mother,
and I should not have to change.”
She then proceeded to launch into a
list of complaints and criticisms of her
daughter’s behavior, outlining the
many ways in which she believed that
Claire should change and be more submissive to her authority.
Case Example—Bob
Bob, age 16, was referred for treatment
after being caught under the influence
of alcohol and possibly other drugs at a
school function. Bob denied any misuse
of alcohol and stated that his only problem was that someone told the principal that he had been drinking. When
confronted, Bob stated that he had no
problem and that everyone did it so
that he was being singled out unfairly.
He became angry and felt that everyone
was overreacting to what he characterized as “normal behavior.”
Between the first and second session,
Bob stole his older brother’s ID so that
he could purchase a keg of beer for a
party. When confronted, Bob again became angry and said that this had nothing to do with his alcohol use and his
only problem was in getting caught. Bob
started yelling at his parents for their
own drinking behavior. When his therapist suggested that all of these incidents
involved his use of alcohol, he again
stated that alcohol was not a problem
and refused to talk about it any more.
330 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Patients at this point are actively avoiding, resisting, or opposing change.
They are most often unwilling to work on change and expend great energy displacing blame for their current difficulty. The key statements by the patient are,
“I don’t need to change,” or, “Others should be nicer to me and then I would
not have to change.”
Precontemplation
In the precontemplation stage, a person begins to consider the consequences,
purpose, and the possibility of change but the process is short-circuited. It is a
metacognitive state wherein the patient is thinking about thinking about
change. Patients at this point are not actively considering the implications of
change nor are they significantly invested in resisting or opposing change. They
simply have not considered it, or may be postponing or rationalizing the need
for change. The key attitude of the patient is, “I’ll get around to changing one of
these days if and when I need to,” or “This problem is not really all that bad.”
Precontemplators might passively wait for motivation to strike, perhaps
wishing for things to be different but never focusing sufficient attention to
enter the contemplation stage. Not thinking about change is a way of coping
with the potential stress that actual intentions might precipitate. Energy is required to make a change, and staying the same is easier. It may be the only option if patients lack the energy and supportive resources to initiate and sustain
the change process. The precontemplation stage may be brief or it may be prolonged if nothing compels movement to the next stage. Patients may be vaguely
aware that self-change is needed to solve a particular problem, but they do not
pursue further self-examination in hopes that other circumstances will alleviate the need for such effort. In effect, patients hope that the problem will go
away or become unimportant by one means or another, or that they will feel
more empowered to change under different circumstances in the indeterminate future.
Case Example
Mary was a single, 32-year-old woman
with significant debt. She sensed that
she could do a better job with her finances, but minimized the potential
consequences of this as a problem. She
assumed that she would be getting a
reasonable inheritance eventually and
that she would also marry someone
who would take care of her finances.
Given these two assumptions, she did
not really see a need to develop any
other financial skills and or to label her
current level of functioning in this domain as a problem. Thinking about the
extent of her debts upset her so she just
did not dwell on the subject. She did
not want to try to change her spending
habits because spending less money
would mean a total meltdown of her
personal and social life. She believed
that she was incapable of such change
and that it was really unnecessary and
perhaps even damaging in the long run
anyway. After all, if she did not spend
the money to dress nicely and socialize
in all the “right” places, she would not
be able to meet the husband who was
supposed to pick up the financial reins.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 331
In precontemplation, the individual is unaware or underaware of problem
behaviors and the associated consequences and has no intention to change any
time in the foreseeable future. Precontemplators may wish for change to occur,
but their idea of change is external or eventual.
Contemplation
Contemplation is the stage in which the person more deeply considers that an
internal problem exists and gives serious thought to personal behavior change
in the near future. However, the person has not yet made a significant commitment to action or established a realistic and effective plan.
Attempts to implement an action-oriented intervention at this stage may
be ineffective or even detrimental, as efficient self-change depends on doing
the right things (processes) at the right time (stage; Prochaska et al., 1992). In
addition, effective change also requires having sufficient circumstantial or social support. Contemplation is thus a critical, systematic, and meaningful stage
that requires sufficient energy and attention.
Case Example
Jessie, a 17-year-old female was referred to treatment after telling her parents that she was addicted to heroin
and felt scared about her escalating use.
Jessie had been using heroin since the
age of 15. She admitted to snorting
heroin on a daily basis and that her use
had escalated from a couple of “lines” a
day to 9 “bags” a day. She had been able
to stop for a maximum of 2 days, but
was unable to stop for a longer time
than that. Jessie stated that she had a
family history of addiction and that a
maternal aunt died of a heroin overdose 2 years earlier. Her parents were
supportive, but they found it difficult
to follow through with treatment recommendations if Jessie objected to
them. Jessie and her parents became
tearful during the initial session as they
talked about the death of her aunt.
Jessie was unable to understand how
she could sometimes hate her addiction
yet remain so attached to it despite the
obvious risks.
During sessions, it became obvious
that Jessie did not have adequate coping skills for simple daily problems let
alone the skill to get through the emotional, physical, and social turmoil of
detoxification and recovery from
heroin dependence. Jessie’s strength
was her intelligence which was evident
in her honor student status in high
school despite her addiction to heroin.
This strength was also a source of liability in her contemplation of change, as it
led her to (erroneously) believe that
she had intellectual control over her
substance use. She thought, “I’m smart
enough to stop whenever I want.
Maybe I will feel like stopping when I
go to college.”
Contemplation is a state of actively considering change. Patients presenting at this stage typically have discomfort and are seeking relief, but lack clarity
in their intention to take on the tasks of change. The patient’s motivation is beginning to build momentum, but could just as easily diminish at this point.
Motivation can be enhanced through specific activities that help the patient
332 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
evaluate the risks and benefits of changing versus not changing and begin to develop a concrete understanding of how change occurs.
The therapy goal of contemplation is to help patients consider what they
might be able to do, what will be necessary for success, and why they might
choose to make the effort. Some patients become stuck in the contemplation
stage, substituting repetitive thinking for action, and in effect become “chronic
contemplators” (Prochaska & Norcross, 2003, p. 520). Contemplators are evaluating their options and values in considering self-change, but may be vulnerable to intractable rumination.
Preparation/Action Planning
Preparation is the stage in which intentions and actions begin to converge. The
intention to take action is immediate or close at hand, with significant action
expected within days or weeks. Small but definite behaviors mark this stage,
and these help solidify the intention for additional effort.
Case Example
Sam, a 19-year-old college student came
to therapy stating, “I need to study and
can’t seem to do it all. When I was in
high school I didn’t need to study. I
breezed right through without cracking
a book. Now I’m getting Cs and Ds and
can’t seem to get it together to study and
do the papers. I end up overwhelmed
and then sit around and watch television
even when I know that I need to be
studying.” Sam had begun to carry a
textbook to class so he could review
right before lectures started, but he
needed a more comprehensive plan. He
needed a road map that he could follow
in changing his behavior so that he could
attain better academic performance.
Patients at this point are actively planning change. They have made a
thoughtful decision and are willing to work on the actions needed to fulfill
their change agenda. They are looking for advice on what to do and how to do
it, and will typically attempt to use suggestions the provider may offer. Motivation may increase at this stage, as change is more fully conceptualized as a series of possible behaviors. Motivation may also decrease at this stage, as the
bulk of the action remains ahead, and the patient may cycle back to a previous
stage of contemplation or precontemplation. Support and encouragement to
change as well as a focus on specific small actions can facilitate the patient’s
successful negotiation of the preparation stage.
Action
The action stage is the key point at which observable changes in behavior, experiences, or interactions gain momentum. Patients are making changes within
themselves to overcome a problem. Some patients will enter therapy at this
point, having worked through the contemplation and preparation stages on
their own, with the assistance of friends and other supports, or through previous and related treatment efforts. These are the patients who will respond rapidly to action-oriented techniques and progress quickly in therapy.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 333
It is a fundamental mistake to assume that every patient entering therapy is at the action stage. Many patients are not really at this stage of readiness or level of motivation to change. This is often because they have not
sufficiently addressed matters of contemplation and preparation, or they do
not have sufficient energy or available resources to support the effort that will
be needed. The patient who is not actually in the action stage may feel an urgent desire to change right away, but does not have a clear sense of what
might be involved or how to deal with practical or psychological challenges in
the execution of change.
Case Example
Jose, a 43-year-old Hispanic male was
referred to outpatient treatment through
the employee assistance program (EAP)
at his place of work after requesting assistance with his substance abuse problem. Jose has been in mental health
treatment for this problem several times
over the past 15 years. He admitted that
he was not ready for change at those
times. However, he now felt that he was
at the point in his life where he would
probably die soon if he didn’t change.
Based on his previous experiences, he
felt that he had a pretty good understanding of what it was going to take to
turn his life around. At intake, he was
diagnosed as chemically dependent with
cocaine as his drug of choice. From the
first session of therapy, Jose was able to
remain abstinent for 45 days and attend
daily 12-step support group meetings as
well as participate in individual and
group counseling. He reported that he
was performing his work at an adequate
level, and he had no current disciplinary
or attendance problems. He followed his
therapist’s suggestion that he monitor
his thoughts and behaviors in a journal
so he could discuss them in his therapy
sessions and generally engaged in a productive alliance with all providers.
Other people in the patient’s life become most aware of changes at the
action stage, and will react according to their own frame of reference. The reactions of others can either help or hinder the patient’s continued effort. However, the efforts of the previous stages will pay off at this point, as those who
have worked through consideration of others reactions’ and made some
preparations for handling this are best equipped to maintain their course of
action.
Those patients who have attempted to go directly into the action stage
without much contemplation or preparation may have the roughest challenge, as they are in effect attempting to leap a tall building in a single bound.
With some sustained action and initial success, motivation can be expected to
increase.
Prelapse
Prelapse is a stage with active and often overwhelming cognitions related to reversal of the changed behavior or pattern of behavior. There is longing for old
times and circumstances, and a resurgence of thoughts and desires consistent
with a return to previous functioning.
334 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
The patient is craving an old way of being, but this craving is based on an
idealized memory of the experiences. The desire to return to old ways may be
triggered by current stress, or it may be simply a spontaneous recovery of associations set in motion by an emotionally provocative memory. This is a crucial
junction in the change process, as it may be the beginning of a spontaneous return to a previous level of functioning. However, specific targeted interventions can address this problem early, before an entire chain of behavior is
reactivated.
Case Example
Ryan had a year of sobriety from alcohol
and pot when the stress of Christmas
holidays began to wear on him. Although he felt committed to sobriety
and was happy with his progress, he began to long for the “good old days” of
“partying” and having fun. He felt sorry
for himself because he no longer had the
camaraderie that he had experienced
with drinking buddies. On the day of his
office holiday party, he started having
fond memories of past celebrations.
As he sat in his office listening to the
sounds of merriment down the hall,
with champagne corks popping and beer
bottles clinking with the offering of
cheerful toasts, he began to ruminate
that as a nondrinker, he could no longer
enjoy holiday parties “like everyone
else.” He longed for the imagined happiness of his past. He underrecalled the
negative aspects of this glorious past
when a bottle of beer on Friday led to a
weekend-long binge and trouble showing up sober on Monday. Labeling this
identifiable change as a prelapse might
help Ryan recognize how dangerously
close he was to a behavioral reversal of
change, sliding back toward his substance abuse in an effort to recapture an
idealized past.
This is a crucial point in the change process. Active, directive disputation,
problem solving, and review of cognitive and behavioral skills can short-circuit
the prelapse before it leads to the next stage.
Lapse
Lapse is the stage where the skills needed to go from action to maintenance decrease or are ignored. This is not a full return to prechange patterns, but the
stage is set for relapse to occur. The individual contemplates the reasons for
changing back to old ways, and has behavioral slips in that direction.
Affect during the lapse may run the gamut, from panic to anger to resignation or even relief. What happens at this juncture is critical to whether the
lapse is corrected, or progresses further into a broader relapse of old patterns of
thought, affect, and behavior.
Case Example
Ryan is sitting alone in his office during
the group holiday party, feeling socially
alienated and sorry about his sobriety.
He finally comes to the conclusion,
“Screw it, if I want a beer, I’m going to
have a beer.” So he ambles down the
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 335
Patients at this point are both working at change and starting to revert to
previous patterns of action. They are not immediately opposing change but
they have gotten careless about managing stress, staying focused, and accessing
support for change. They may be going through a natural rejection of the new
behavior or think that they are beyond the need to make a concerted effort.
Relapse
Relapse is the stage at which there is a return to the behaviors that caused the
original referral that had been altered in the action stage. Relapse constitutes a
crisis for most patients. Immediate intervention is crucial for the patient to continue to progress forward and not recycle back to precontemplation or anticontemplation. The patient may think, “I’m right back where I started from” and
begin to recover the original behavior pattern.
Case Example (Continued)
hall and amidst claps of welcome from
his colleagues, he grabs a beer, which
he found tasted “bitter and nasty.” He
looked around at his coworkers and noticed a range of drinking behavior, including two who were not drinking
alcohol at all, a few who he knew
would stop after one or two drinks, and
a couple of guys whom he labeled as
“just like the old me,” already on their
4th drink and likely to make a night or
even a weekend of it.
Case Example
Ryan did not progress into the full relapse stage, which might have involved
joining the guys who were like his “old”
self. Even though he did not progress
from lapse to relapse, he was vulnerable to doing so. If he had greatly enjoyed the drink, embraced his old self
and old buddies, and continued to
think of sobriety as overrated, he might
have been more likely to progress into
full relapse where he returned to all his
old behaviors and made no effort to
change. Lacking the skill to distinguish
prelapse, lapse, and relapse can increase vulnerability to relapse, as one
slip may be magnified into huge failure, with concomitant guilt and resignation. In that case, Ryan might think,
“Well, I’ve done it now. I’ve messed up,
so I might as well enjoy myself.” Such
thoughts provide a gateway to spontaneous recovery of the old patterns,
even if he doesn’t really enjoy himself
very much.
Redirection
Redirection is the process that must be implemented in the prelapse as well as
possible lapse or relapse stages. Redirection involves the recognition that one is
off track concerning change, that further effort is needed to avoid reversal of
change, and that the reasons for making changes may need to be reviewed and
updated. Further, the specific methods of getting back on track and overcoming
the temptation or the lapse/relapse need to be specified. As noted, being able to
336 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
distinguish each of these stages is quite helpful for both patient and therapist.
Any indications of these stages are important to the change process, and merit
attention and explicit discussion. It is important to consider and discuss what is
happening when the patient wants to revert to old ways, and when small shifts
in attitude or behavior are noted.
Case Example
Ryan did not automatically understand
these stages of change. Fortunately, he
was an active participant in his therapy,
and he brought up his feelings of frustration and deprivation, and was forthcoming about his behavior, opening the
door for labeling the stages of prelapse
and lapse. He explored his reactions to
the lapse of drinking a beer in some detail, noting that the majority of his associates were either nondrinkers or
moderate drinkers. Thus, his belief that
“everyone” was partying and drinking a
great deal was inconsistent with the evidence from his own observations. A
careful review of his past personal experience helped him remember that he did
not typically drink in moderation, and
that occasional use was neither an effective or satisfying option for him. Redirection efforts included this review of
himself and his reasons for change, a reconsideration of his environment and
his perceptions of others, recommitment
to his specific goals (sobriety), and returning to use of behavior change methods including counterconditioning and
stress management, as well as accessing
social support from his spouse, new
friends, and an online recovery discussion group.
Maintenance
Finally, in the maintenance stage, behavior change is stabilized into an enduring new pattern or lifestyle. One of the most significant challenges is avoiding
relapse or reactivation of previous problematic behaviors.
Patients will present differently at the maintenance stage, as some actively recognize the importance of support and others may be prone to taking
the stability of their changes for granted. Therapeutic goals are to (a) fine-tune
and adjust changes, (b) support growth, (c) encourage stability, and (d) help
patients become their own therapist.
Case Example
Ryan continued treatment for short periods (one to six sessions) over several
years on an “as needed” basis. He completed his master’s degree and found a
job where there was less drinking among
coworkers. After working through a few
additional lapses with redirection and no
relapse, he became more confident in his 
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 337
Although it might be tempting to view maintenance as a static stage with
an absence of change, it is more accurate to consider it an ongoing effort with
unique challenges. Patients actively maintain changes even in new contexts or
situations and are sensitive to cues that indicate the potential for relapse. Patients appreciate their volitional role and understand change as a process that
involves a variety of tasks and resources.
Facilitating Change
Although we are strongly encouraged as therapists to initiate action in the very
first session, to “hit the ground running,” not everyone is at the same stage of
action readiness when therapy begins. Contrary to common assumption, simply presenting for therapy does not mean the patient has already progressed
through contemplation and preparation for change. An individualized approach means working forward from the patient’s current stage at the outset of
therapy, and targeting the intervention to the patient’s state of readiness for
change. Providing a secure, supportive therapeutic environment that focuses
on selected tasks and goals can help the patient find the energy to engage in the
process, tolerate the emotional risks, and titrate the destabilization of moving
from one stage to another.
Patients who enter therapy in a stage of readiness for action are most
likely to have a successful outcome in therapy. A study of smoking cardiac patients found that the pretreatment stage of change was clearly related to outcome, as those who were not smoking at 12 months were those who began the
study either in preparation or action (76%), versus those who were contemplating change (43%), and those who were precontemplators (22%; Ockene,
Ockene, & Kristellar, 1988). Another large study of smokers followed over 18
months found that patients who could progress just one stage forward in a
month more than doubled their likelihood of taking action on their own (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1992).
Case Example (Continued)
ability to maintain change on his own.
For a long period, he was out of contact
with his therapist. Eventually, he was in
line for a managerial position, married,
and raising two children. Ryan decided
to return to regular therapy because he
wanted a tune-up for dealing with the
new stresses in his life. He was keenly
aware that if he did not effectively manage these new stressors, the likelihood
of a relapse would increase. As Ryan
moved further into the demands of the
business world and his adult life, he had
less access to emotional support, and he
found himself questioning his competence to succeed. At this point of maintenance, Ryan needed to focus on the
strengths that had supported his sobriety
over several years and generalize those
skills to the challenges of his current job
and family roles.
338 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Many reasonable candidates for therapy fail to obtain the benefit because
they drop out or terminate treatment prematurely, without any notable change
or problem resolution. Although approximately 30% to 40% of patients terminate prematurely, we cannot reliably predict who will drop out and who will
not. The variables that help predict psychotherapy outcome such as client characteristics or problem duration do not offer much in terms of accurately targeting potential drop-outs. However, one study correctly identified 93% of those
who prematurely terminated by their pretreatment stage of change (Medieros
& Prochaska, 1993). It is no surprise that those who dropped out of treatment
were in the precontemplation stage. Those who terminated quickly but appropriately were those who entered treatment in the action stage, and these were
fewer in number overall. Those who continued in treatment were those who
entered in the contemplation stage. Thus, the patient who can complete a successful therapy in 6 to 10 sessions is one who enters treatment prepared to take
action. The patient who attends some therapy but fails to benefit is likely to be
stalled at the stage of precontemplation. Those patients who have more complex problems and less preparation for change will have a longer course of psychotherapy, extending from 6 months to years, if they can be engaged in a
process of contemplation and planning action.
Is it important to use methods or processes that are targeted to specific
stages? The empirical answer to that question is yes. Significant evidence accumulated from over 20 years of research in behavioral medicine and psychotherapy shows the differential effectiveness of different processes (Prochaska &
Norcross, 2003), including a recent meta-analysis of 47 cross-sectional studies
showing a large effect of different processes across the stages (C. S. Rosen,
2000). The results of this body of research offer psychotherapists an evidencedbased foundation for systematic and efficient use of psychotherapy methods
and procedures to facilitate change.
Adjusting Intervention to Stage of Change
How do people move through the stages of change? The initial steps appear to
be consciousness or awareness of a problem and whether the problem is biological (physical symptoms or impairments), psychological (emotional distress,
cognitive impairments, behavioral dysfunctions), or social (interpersonal, role,
family, or community impairment), or some combination of these dimensions.
At the precontemplation stage (and its variants), little time or energy is invested in self-evaluation. If there are negative aspects to a problem, the individual does not react much to them. At this stage, the person is rather closed to
new information, perhaps even downright hostile as noted, and will resist owning the problem or planning behavior changes.
The most helpful therapeutic stance for precontemplation is likely to be a
supportive approach that draws patients into a consideration of their circumstances. Offering an opportunity to examine thoughts and feelings in an understanding and nondemanding atmosphere may help the patient move toward
greater recognition that a possible problem exists. Providing the patient with
normative information may also be useful, as a reference point for the patient’s
self-evaluation.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 339
The greatest challenge at this stage is developing a rapport that fosters
problem exploration and keeps the patient engaged in the treatment process.
Just intellectually recognizing there is a problem, however, is not likely to be
sufficient for progressing toward contemplation of change. Some emotional
connection to the consequences of the problem is needed. The problem has to
matter in some emotionally relevant way. Bringing this emotional component
into awareness can be accomplished through a variety of affective techniques
such as expressive dialogue or guided discussion of personal values, culturally
relevant impacts, and socially normative alternatives.
Fortuitous life events that affect the patient, even through observation
only, may help bring feelings into consciousness. The diagnosis or loss of a loved
one to a serious illness may be a wake-up call to contemplation. Near-death experiences of the patient or others may precipitate caring enough about chronically maladaptive conditions. For example, a young soldier has a near-death
experience in combat, and decides that his life at home will significantly change
on his return. He is prompted to seriously consider his passive acceptance of his
spouse’s alcohol abuse and neglect of the children and home, and how inconsistent that is with his desired family life. This leads to planning the steps he will
begin to take to change this unhappy and no longer acceptable situation.
The contemplation stage is marked by increased openness to information
and self-evaluation. Interventions such as clinical assessment as well as psychoeducation, bibliotherapy, and exposure to the coping strategies used by others are helpful at this point. Empowered by more thorough information, the
patient has the tools to evaluate options. A therapeutic stance of guiding the
patient through information gathering and decision making is helpful, along
with the use of truly exploratory Socratic questions. Attention to the patient’s
key values is central to moving this process along, as it is the effects most cared
about that will spur the effort to action. It is also important to examine the
sources of ambivalence about change as the patient also has a valued attachment to some aspects of the behavior in question. As noted, some patients—
and some therapists—are prone to become stuck in the contemplation stage,
endlessly considering issues and feelings, but not taking the next step of determining what direction is important in the patient’s life. Both may believe, mistakenly, that continuous rumination about options can reduce anxiety or
discomfort with the available options, and that keeping options open will result
in a more satisfactory outcome in the long run. As patients evaluate what matters most and the impact on significant others, some sense of direction should
emerge. This will help move patients into the next stage, of preparing to take
action. Chronic contemplation can be identified as a specific choice of action
that results in vague commitment and ongoing discomfort, rather than more effective choices.
In the preparation stage, patients formulate a plan for what to change and
how to change it, with specific action steps beginning to take shape. The path of
change may not be detailed down to the minutiae, but there are goals and priorities and some idea of how to achieve these objectives. The therapist continues to
provide support and encouragement, and also coaches patients on specific methods or procedures that are apt to facilitate success. Small action steps are recognized and highly encouraged. In this stage, the therapist shares the methods of
340 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
psychotherapy in ways that empower patients to see that change is possible and
within their control. The therapist can help focus patients’ efforts, and provide
crucial reassurance that their actions are contributing to a productive purpose.
Patients may be hesitant and overwhelmed at this point, and often need liberal
doses of reinforcement for their initial change efforts.
In the action stage, therapists help maintain the affective and cognitive
foundations of the earlier stages and provide technical support for the behavioral change efforts. They can help patients effectively apply techniques of
counterconditioning, stimulus control, and contingency management, as well as
manage thoughts or emotions that might get in the way of using the behavioral
technology. Encouragement, accountability, and partnership all are important in
the action stage. Patients are surrounded by advice on the action of change, and
may be drawn off track by many distractions or misdirections. Others’ suggestions may be helpful and right on target, or they may be poorly informed or
downright sabotaging to the patient’s intentions. Thus, an effective therapeutic
stance is that of an informed (and patient) consultant who knows the particulars
of the patient’s situation and is keeping track of both progress and direction of
change. The therapist can encourage persistence when the changes become difficult, tedious, or questionable. When one method doesn’t seem to be working,
the therapist can be helpful in offering alternative strategies if needed.
Maintenance begins when the change has been substantially implemented
for a noted period of time, often 6 months or longer. Prelapse, lapse, and relapse
are important at this stage as well as ways to cope with these stressors through
redirection. Developing a new or adjusted sense of identity is also important for
success in the maintenance stage. The patient incorporates the problem into his
or her view of self, and the accomplished or ongoing change as desirable and
real. Ryan, the patient described earlier in the stages of change, came to see
himself as a person in recovery from alcohol and substance abuse. A smoker
begins to think of himself as a nonsmoker. A patient with agoraphobia thinks of
herself as a highly sensitive but functioning and mobile individual. The betterdefined the change is, and the more clearly the patient can articulate a positive
sense of identity to associate with the change, the more likely it is that change
can be maintained without spiraling back to earlier stages.
The procedures most helpful at this stage include reviewing reasons to
maintain the change, behavioral ways to maintain the change, and enhancing
identification and contact with others who behave this way and who endorse
the new identity. Risks at this stage include overestimating the stability of the
behavior change, underestimating the need for any ongoing effort or sensitivity to potential to lapse or relapse, and under-utilizing productive interpersonal support.
Evaluating Change
Measuring Change
Measurement of change in psychotherapy is a somewhat controversial issue.
Many clinicians do not use external measures of outcome or patient change in
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 341
their clinical practice. In one survey (Hatfield & Ogles, 2004), only 37.1% of 874
responding psychologists said they used any form of outcome measure in practice. This is similar to other reports of 29% (Phelps, Eisman, & Kohout, 1998),
and 23% of child and adolescent clinicians (Bickman et al., 2000). There are also
many providers and consumers who think that measurement of change is an important component of a systematic approach to clinical practice. Thus, it is important to understand the factors that facilitate or hinder this action in practice.
According to the Hatfield and Ogles (2004) survey of a random sample of
practitioner members of APA (American Psychological Association), training in
the use of outcome assessment strategies was significantly related to practitioners’ behavior. Presumably, training helps providers to know what measures to
use, how and when to use them, and whether it is clinically useful to do so.
Further, this survey explored both the uses and barriers to measuring change in
clinical practice. The most important uses were in tracking progress since intake, measuring overall problem severity, evaluating specific problems, and
tracking the maintenance of therapeutic gains over time. The barriers to outcome measurement were either practical or strategic. The practical reasons
were things such as taking too much time or burdening the patient or therapist
with paperwork, and the strategic reasons related to incompatibility with therapeutic approach or threat to professional integrity or confidentiality. Overall,
the strategic reasons were less prominent than practical ones as a factor in practitioner behavior.
For the measurement of change to be a functional component of the treatment process, the methods need to meet basic assessment criteria of reliability
and validity, as well as be suitable to the problem and treatment setting. The
most commonly used methods involve well-standardized, easily administered
symptom checklists that provide direct measures of specific problems. These include the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; A. T. Beck et al., 1996), the Beck
Anxiety Inventory (BAI; A. T. Beck, Epstein, Brown, & Steer, 1988), the Child
Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991), and the SCL-90-R (Derogatis,
1983; Hatfield & Ogles, 2004). Patients can complete these inventories quickly
and easily in a waiting area, or in the first few minutes of a meeting. Many
other clinical instruments are potentially available for use in evaluating specific
clinical problems and overall severity or tracking progress over time. These can
frequently be located either through test vendors, or through a research literature review for a specific problem.
Other options for measuring patient change over the course of treatment
include individualized tracking of target behaviors, changes in the global assessment of functioning, and reports of the patient or significant others concerning relevant psychological or emotional changes. These methods are
discussed in depth in Chapters 7 and 8. Observational methods of charting
change are particularly helpful because of the direct relevance to the main reasons for seeking therapy. Patients often come to therapy with a specific agenda
of changing a behavior, solving a problem, or improving their functioning.
Guiding a patient through self-assessment for evidence of change, or lack of
change in the presenting problem is important both for patient satisfaction and
feedback to the clinician on the usefulness of treatment.
Measuring specific target behavior can be useful in the process of tracking
change because it is both observable and quantifiable. One option is to measure
342 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
increases in functional behaviors such as regular exercise or social contacts.
Another option is to measure decreases in harmful behaviors such as purging,
cutting, or school or work truancy. It may not always be easy to identify a specific target behavior to track as context plays a role in whether a behavior is
functional or dysfunctional. However, this can be taken into consideration
when determining the target. Being present in the workplace is generally a
functional behavior, but staying at work for excessive hours while obsessively
checking is not adaptive. Thus, the behavior to track might include the number
of days where work was completed within designated work hours, without
repetitive checking. In most instances, a brief inquiry and patient self-report or
self-monitoring is sufficient to measure and track the progress in these areas
over time. Depending on the clinical context, other sources of information may
be added to the patient’s report to get the most reliable index of change. An example of this is the patient in drug treatment who submits a urine sample to be
tested for substances as a corroboration of his or her self-report of abstinence.
Behavioral tools are relatively easy to use, require minimal time or paperwork to administer, and may enhance the integrity of the treatment by tracking
progress toward overall objectives. At least one measure of symptoms and one
target behavior to track for increases or decreases can easily provide a foundation
of change measurement for routine practice. If the patient’s desired outcome is to
be less stressed and worried and to live a calmer lifestyle, we might use an anxiety checklist to track both problem severity and progress over time. In addition,
we might ask the patient to monitor the frequency of tension-reducing activities
such as exercise or meditation. Thus, the measurement of change can be streamlined in a way that is both workable and valuable to the clinical process.
Communicating about Change
An important feature of contemporary therapy is the frequent occurrence of
direct communications about change between patient and therapist and possibly clinical and external third parties. Patients and therapists talk about the
processes and methods of change and are likely to directly discuss expectations,
responsibilities, and satisfaction with the rate and direction of change. Communications about change may take place either in a formal, written context, or in
an informal or conversational exchange. The particular concerns of any communication vary with the intended audience, so we will give separate consideration to patients, external third parties, and clinical third parties.
Communicating with Patients about Change
Discussion of change is typically part of the agenda whenever the patient and
therapist have contact. When a patient and therapist meet, the patient reports
on changes experienced since the last meeting, for better or worse. If the patient
does not spontaneously report such developments, the therapist will inquire and
attempt to socialize the patient toward noticing and reporting changes.
The focusing of attention on noticeable differences helps the patient to recognize the process of change as it is happening. Noticing improvements also encourages a cognitive shift toward more constructive focus of attention. This
discussion may involve changes in affect in specific situations or encounters,
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 343
changes in overall mood, changes in thoughts, attitude, or mental activity, or
changes in behaviors or actions. The data used to guide such discussion may
come from the symptom inventories or self-monitoring records or diaries assigned as homework, or may come from the patient’s recollection and self-report.
Observations of others may also be part of the change data, as shared by the patient’s report or perhaps directly communicated by the outside entity.
Over time, as the clinician gathers a database of experience and information, a repertoire of relevant questions can be developed. Some of those questions may become part of clinical routine, perhaps asking each patient, “What
changes have you experienced since we last met?” As you get to know different
patients, you can help them spot changes that are particularly relevant to their
interpersonal and intrapsychic world. This discussion of change adds meaning
and depth to differences that may be evident on symptom inventories or other
measures of functioning. If you know that a given client has often responded
passively to challenges or difficulties at work, it will be easier to notice and comment on a report of behaving more assertively with a work project. Or you may
be able to help a patient see that certain discrete actions such as volunteering to
chair a committee are important shifts in a more functional direction, even (or
especially) when difficult feelings like anxiety are part of the experience.
The clinician’s professional opinion on the evidence of progress and relevance of change is typically important in encouraging the patient’s persistence
and motivation in treatment. Sometimes it is required by third-party payers in
the form of a treatment progress report, where specific clinical information is
required. Thus, it is crucial to pay attention to the change taking place and
provide feedback to the patient on your observations. Much of the time, the
feedback is delivered in the course of discussion, but other structured communications may be useful or necessary. The structure of the communication will depend on the clinical context and vary in degree of complexity.
A simple structured communication might be a summary and perhaps
charting of symptom index measures over the course of treatment, which is
communicated informally to the patient in the course of ongoing treatment.
You might use a whiteboard or graph paper and list changes in the Beck Depression Inventory over the course of several weeks of treatment, to show the
client visually how much change has taken place (see Figure 12.1). By discussing this during a treatment session, you can talk about what steps, interventions, or changes accompanied the shifts in symptoms.
In the case illustrated in Figure 12.1, the initial slight increase in moodrelated symptoms was related to specific stressors, including a major work project that coincided with children’s health problems and other family challenges.
The drop in symptoms noted between Sessions 11 and 14 was associated with
some alleviation in the situational stresses, and continued use of specific coping
skills. The client could see that as she continued to make the effort to resolve
her stress and cope as effectively as possible, she began to feel considerably better, even though she still faced day-to-day challenges.
Communicating with Care Management and Other External Third Parties
When it is necessary to communicate with third-party care managers, a more
complex and formal communication is typically required. For patients using
some form of managed behavioral health care insurance coverage, this is a
common requirement for accessing benefits, as of this writing. Most often, a
specific form is provided by the managed care company for the clinician to
complete, either on paper or by secured electronic submission.
Managed care progress reports typically require the clinician to report a
diagnosis and ratings of the severity of stressors and overall functioning, as well
as the presence of risk indicators such as self-harming behaviors or substance
abuse, medications being used, communications with other primary care
providers, and need for additional treatment. Thus beginning to gather this information at the onset of therapy will enable completing this important communication in a timely manner.
A care manager subsequently reviews this information and either provides approval for additional treatment, denies payment authorization based on
the patient’s insurance contract, or requests further discussion of the client’s
care with the clinician if warranted. Follow-up with the clinician is most likely
when there are any questions about the patient’s risk level, such as with suicidal intent, to ensure that treatment is of sufficient quality and intensity to
meet the patient’s needs.
Denial of authorization by an insurance carrier is primarily a denial of authorization of payment under the patient’s contract for service. This does not mean
that a patient is disallowed to continue treatment, but rather that the patient and
344 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Figure 12.1
Mood over Time
10
15
20
25
30 Depression score
Session number (Series 1)
1 5 7 11 14 16 23 26
therapist must determine an appropriate course of action that is in the patient’s
best interest, including alternative payment arrangements or use of alternative
treatment or community support resources. Insurance carriers make decisions
about authorizing payment for services; the patient and therapist make decisions
about what services are needed and what the options and alternatives may be.
The most complex and formal communication with an external third
party might be a written report that summarizes repeated observations, assessments, or the results of multiple test instruments across time. This written report may be distributed to one or more parties, and may or may not be released
to the patient, depending on the circumstances. In the instance of a complex
and formal written summary or opinion, this would most likely have been
specified as an objective at the beginning of the treatment consultation, and appropriate informed consent obtained (e.g., the patient may have been remanded to treatment by an outside entity such as the court, and the formal
report is required as a condition of the order).
Beginning clinicians are advised that this latter circumstance is a specialized application of clinical practice requiring appropriate training and
supervised experience to effectively execute both the treatment and the corresponding communications. Any release of written clinical information
should be done deliberately and carefully, to ensure that appropriate safeguards to patient confidentiality are maintained, and that appropriate ethical
and legal responsibilities are addressed.
Communicating with Clinical Third Parties
Several clinical situations involve communications about patient change with
third parties who are part of the treatment process. One is when the therapist is
part of a treatment team, as often occurs in hospital, clinic, or school settings
where other professionals are also working with the patient on a target health
or mental health problem. Typically, the team will have a set time to discuss
progress and relevant concerns of their patients, but this may not always be the
case. If there is not a designated time for a team meeting, the clinician may need
to initiate contact with other treating professionals to exchange information
about the patient.
In all such cases, a written consent from the patient, or the patient’s parent or guardian in the case of a minor, is required for such information to be
disclosed or exchanged with any third party. This written consent may be
woven into the routine intake procedure, for example when a patient is seen in
a medical clinic such as pediatric diabetes clinic or adolescent eating disorders
clinic. If the consent is not obtained on intake, a specific discussion of informed
consent for this communication needs to be conducted with the patient, along
with signed documentation of the discussion and consent.
Although the consent for this communication needs to be specifically
structured, the information that is actually exchanged is typically less structured as the treating professionals simply discuss their observations, concerns,
and notations of progress or change. This communication serves many purposes. These include helping establish common goals, sharing points of encouragement, identifying any obstacles to further change, and generally helping
everyone be “on the same page” in providing consistent and coherent care.
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 345
Beginning clinicians are often hesitant to discuss a patient with other professionals who may take a very different perspective on the patient’s problems,
or perhaps be less than sensitive to psychological considerations. Such communications can be productively directed by keeping the focus on the patient’s best
interest and realizing that differences in perspectives are part of the reason for
the exchange of information. Sharing features of the psychological case conceptualization with other involved clinicians helps them have a broader understanding of the patient and contribute to the patient’s overall quality of care.
The psychological perspective is a unique and valuable contribution to a multidisciplinary consultation.
Another circumstance involving communications with clinically involved
third parties is interactions with family members or significant others of the patient. These communications can be crucial to the ongoing process of change,
yet should always be guided by the priority of the patient’s best interest. Both
clinical skill and knowledge of the boundaries of confidentiality are needed to
successfully execute such contacts. There are many possible circumstances
where the clinician will receive inquiries about the patient’s progress and potential for change, and not all of them merit a direct response. If there is any
doubt, the superordinate ethical standard of privacy and confidentiality (APA,
2002; 4.00–4.07) should prevail, at least until the situation can be clarified.
Family members, including spouses or parents of majority age young
adults, do not automatically have a right to information concerning the patient,
unless the patient gives specific consent to disclosure. This is true even if the familial third party is paying the bill. The consent for disclosure should be obtained formally for adult patients, in the manner noted for other treating
professionals. The patient may also provide informal consent by bringing a significant other along to a consultation, although it still must be ascertained that
the patient is freely consenting and not being coerced by the significant other.
Where minor children are concerned, a delicate balance must be maintained between protecting the confiding relationship and keeping parents informed so that they can appropriately manage their parental responsibilities. A
general guideline many child clinicians follow is that of making discussion of
change and progress with parents a part of the treatment plan, and informing
their youthful patients at the outset of treatment of necessary disclosure under
any circumstances of harm, danger, high-risk behavior or illegal behavior.
When a patient brings someone into a therapy session such as a partner,
family member, or friend, that person is referred to as a collateral participant in
the patient’s treatment. For a minor, it is usually preferable that at least one parent be involved as a collateral participant in treatment. When the collateral party
enters the treatment room, it is made clear that he or she is not a patient, has no
record of being a patient, and has no rights or privileges regarding information
shared, or financial responsibility (unless as a financially responsible parent).
Sometimes, clinicians have the participant review and sign a formal collateral consent form. The collateral consent form specifically outlines that the person is participating in the therapy at the patient’s request, and for the patient’s
benefit. If it appears that the collateral participant has a personal agenda for
therapy, then it would most likely be appropriate to provide a referral to another provider, or to direct that agenda to designated family therapy sessions.
346 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Clarity in structuring these contacts can help keep the patient’s treatment focused, and prevent any disruption by the interests of others.
With an appropriate structure, there can be many benefits of having communications with significant others as collateral participants. Others often play
an important role in either reinforcing or discouraging change. Sometimes they
interfere with change because they do not have a clear idea about how to best
direct their efforts. Family members may be frightened by emotional distress,
and may worry that placing any demands on the patient will cause the person
to worsen, snap, or have a nervous breakdown. Significant others may be confused about the reasons for psychological symptoms and engage in a pattern of
coercion or negative communication with the patient as a result of their own
frustration. They may be very stressed by the patient’s problems, and pressuring
the patient to use simple solutions, such as to “stop whining and get over yourself.” The tension caused by the “hurry up and get over it” message may greatly
exacerbate the overall distress of everyone. Family members may be reacting
with anger or shame, compounding the patient’s sense of demoralization.
In many clinical situations, significant others either underrespond or
overrespond in assuming some portion of influence on the problem. “What
have I done to cause this?” may be part of their inner struggle, when they are
not a causative element. Alternatively, the defensive posture of “this is not my
problem; you need to fix him/her” can exacerbate the patient’s sense of interpersonal isolation. In such cases, collateral contacts can provide an opportunity
to discuss realistic expectations for the pace and extent of change that is likely,
and what specific attitudes and behaviors are likely to help or hinder the desired change.
With few exceptions, communications with collateral contacts are apt to
have the greatest success when face-to-face discussion is used, rather than formal or written statements. Significant others benefit from sharing information,
having their input taken into consideration, being involved as a relevant party,
and becoming informed about the treatment and expectations for progress. In
informal discussion, their understanding and reactions can be checked, and
their concerns resolved or at least considered.
Written documents provide a much greater risk for misinterpretation or
distortion in a way that may not be beneficial to the patient, and there is less
opportunity to discern what further understanding might be needed. In situations where there are written communications to significant others, as in providing a copy of a psychoeducational evaluation to parents, it is important to
offer an opportunity to explain and discuss what is contained in the report in
language that the family members can understand (APA, 2002, 9.10).
Summary
Change in psychological and behavioral functioning is best conceptualized as a
complex and cumulative process rather than a discrete occurrence at a single
point in time. The patient always remains both the agent and the object of the
change process, setting the pace and determining the extent of emotional risk
Understanding, Facilitating, and Evaluating Change 347
allowed. In the cumulative process of change, there are as many as 10 different
stages of an evolving complex of emotions, thoughts, motivations, and actions.
If we are alert to the stages of change, interventions can be selected for their
usefulness in facilitating progress toward the next step. Evaluating or measuring at least some behavioral and symptomatic aspects of the patient’s functioning is important in demonstrating progress through the stages and toward a
productive purpose. Throughout planning, facilitating, and measuring progress,
there are ongoing communications with the patient about change. This communication may also include others involved in the treatment as third-party
payers and managers of care, other treating professionals, or significant others
who play a role in the change process as part of the patient’s life. Our ability as
clinicians to understand, facilitate, measure, and communicate about a patient’s change affects the focus and direction of treatment, the patient’s engagement, persistence, and motivation, and the successful use of external resources.



Bringing about change is not a simple matter. Even when the clinician is
prepared with the latest scientifically based methods, a comprehensive
conceptualization, and an accurate understanding of the client’s progress in the
cycle of change, impediments may still need to be addressed during therapy.
These obstacles to progress stem from several sources. Although it is tempting
to attribute the obstacles exclusively to conflicts within the client, it is necessary to consider other possible explanations to effectively work through these
clinical barriers.
Before reading the following discussion, ask yourself to think about what
you believe most stands in the way of change. Are the barriers to change in the
client, the therapist, the environment, or embedded in the problem? If clients
claim that they simply cannot change a problem behavior (e.g., overeating), are
the obstacles to change caused by the client’s poor impulse control, the therapist’s misdirected approach, an overabundance of food surrounding the client,
or food addiction and bad genetics?
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Describe how the client can be a source of therapeutic impediment.
• Describe how the therapist can be a source of therapeutic impediment.
• Describe how the environment can be a source of therapeutic impediment.
• Describe how the psychological disorder can be a source of therapeutic
impediment.
• Describe how the therapist can remain relatively unaffected by resistance.
350 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Throughout this text, we have stressed the collaborative nature of the
therapeutic effort. When there is change in the expected and agreed-on direction, when clients can do things that they did not previously attempt, when the
client’s life and efforts are moving in positive and desired directions, both the
therapist and the client experience success and fulfillment. However, like true
love, the course of therapy never (or rarely) runs smoothly. There will be relapses, stagnation, plateaus, backward movement, and even active resistance to
change. This does not necessarily stop therapy, nor does it necessarily injure the
therapeutic efforts. Detours may slow things down, but they can be used for
positive effect. They are, in fact, expected and even to be sought after. After all,
if the client can get back on track in the therapy after a slip, it suggests that they
are building and honing life skills. It provides evidence for the client that a slip
is not the end of the process or a failure. It simply tests clients’ skills so that
they can stay on track when therapy is over.
When therapy gets “stuck,” it is tempting (and simplistic) to blame treatment difficulty (or lack of progress in therapy) on the client’s noncompliance or
resistance. With certain clients and client types, this is easy to do. Adolescents
who generally do not choose therapy on their own, those remanded to therapy
by the judicial system, or those sent to therapy by a family member may be
prone to avoid or resist therapy. This is also true of clients with chronic and pervasive disorders, who have experienced life in a certain way over many years.
After all, if they have been in therapy for many years and have not as yet resolved their myriad difficulties, then how can any one therapist be expected to
help them?
Therapists may find it is convenient to judge some clients as untreatable.
Seeing a client as untreatable lifts any demand or expectation that the therapist
should work longer, harder, or more creatively with the client. Therapists often
assume that when there is no therapeutic movement or when progress lags, it is
because the client does not want to change or get well for conscious or unconscious reasons. Many issues, circumstances, and problems can slow or block
progress in therapy, and only a few are due to the client’s wanting to retain
problems. Think of a “self-help” or “self-improvement” task that you have attempted. This might be losing weight, exercising more regularly, or completing
unfinished, overdue paperwork. To what extent is the lack of follow-through
due to a secret desire to remain fat, out of shape, or lag behind in your paperwork? To what extent is it due to more mundane factors such as personal comfort, time limitations, anxiety, or perfectionism, and to what extent is it some
combination of these factors?
Impediments to change in therapy are costly to clients in terms of their
ongoing pain and discomfort and the price they pay for continued dysfunction.
The cost in human terms is compounded by the economic loss to the individual
and to the economy. It has been estimated that the cost of depression to U.S.
business is 30 to 44 billion dollars per year (Elinson, Houk, Marcus, & Pincus,
2004; Stewart, Ricci, Chee, Hahn, & Morganstein, 2003). This represents the
combined expenses for psychological care, medications, and hospitalization,
and the cost of lost wages due to decreased productivity and absenteeism. Obviously, the financial burden to agencies and institutions is monumental. Estimates of the costs of untreated mental health disorders indicate an additional
Impediments to Change 351
70 billion dollars of lost productivity per year (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 1999). Finally, the emotional and economic costs to families
of delayed or limited change is incalculable. Therapists are not immune to the
price of extended therapy in that noncompliance makes the therapy work more
difficult and personally wearing. This can lead to decreased effectiveness and
ultimately to therapist burnout.
Definitions of Resistance
In traditional psychoanalytic terms, resistance was primarily conceptualized as a
negative patient variable, and a form of pathology embedded in a narcissistic,
false, and pathological character that strove to maintain the status quo at any
cost (Menninger, 1958; Stark, 1994). Campbell (2003) addressed the topic of resistance from a psychoanalytic position. He differentiated between id, ego, or
superego resistances. He identified common themes of client resistance to therapy as involving distrust of the therapist, personal shame, grievances against
others, depreciation, or fear of rejection. Typically, resistance may be manifested
directly (e.g., tardiness or missing of appointments) or more subtly through
omissions in the material reported in the sessions. Writing in 1914, Freud,
quoted in Fine (1979) stated, “It may thus be said that the theory of psychoanalysis is an attempt to account for two striking and unexpected facts of observation which emerge whenever an attempt is made to trace the symptoms of a
neurotic back to sources in his past life; the facts of transference and resistance”
(p. 52).
There are many reasons for noncompliance other than the client not wanting to change or wanting punishment. Resistance is no longer being viewed as
entirely negative or as only a patient variable. Several authors (Adelman & Taylor, 1986; Ellis, 1985; Gerber & Nehemkis, 1986; Meichenbaum & Gilmore, 1982;
Milman & Goldman, 1987) have considered the adaptive nature of resistance.
Many volumes have explored this important issue from a variety of perspectives
(Ellis, 1985; Leahy, 2004, Wachtel, 1982).
Rather than use the term resistance, which has come to mean an action of
the client, we have chosen to use the term impediment to change (Freeman & McCloskey, 2004). This implies that there are many roadblocks (Leahy, 2004) or
speed bumps that do not have to stop progress, but may slow it down. No one
impediment is more powerful or influential than any other. The impact that an
impediment has on the therapeutic progress is related to the meaning to the
client, how the impediment manifests itself, how the therapist deals with it, or
a combination of all of the preceding factors.
Clinically, we can identify several explanations for the impediments to
change that may appear to be the client’s resistance or noncompliance. Impediments can appear in any combination or permutation, and the relative strength
of any noncompliant action may change with the client’s life circumstance, progress in therapy, relationship with the therapist, and so on. We can divide these
impediments to therapy into four broad categories. The first set of impediments is
problems coming from the client. In the second category of impediments are
352 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
those roadblocks that emanate from the therapist and the therapeutic interaction.
The third category includes factors related to the client’s life situation, personal
context, and significant others. The final factors come from the type, severity,
and nature of the client’s problem(s) or behavior. In the following discussion, we
describe therapeutic interventions for reducing or ameliorating these problems
and impediments to therapeutic change.
The manifestation of these impediments may take many forms. Some
would appear more directly negative: verbal or behavioral evasion (“I forgot my
homework for the session. So what?”), verbal hostility (“You are a lousy therapist and haven’t helped me at all.”), threats of physical aggression (“I’ll get you
if you turn me in.”), or threats against the institution or agency (“I’ll blow this
place up.”). Other impediments may be more subtle: frequent lateness for appointments, missing appointments, or extended silence in sessions. And yet
other behaviors may appear positive, but still interfere with progress: trying to
win the therapist over with praise (“You are the best therapist I have ever
had.”), gifts (“I saw this and thought how nice it would look in your office.”), or
statements of devotion (“I could never work with any other therapist.”).
Roadblocks may be conscious, such as when the client chooses to withhold information and details from the therapist so as to appear healthier,
smarter, and more competent (e.g., not reporting having failed a test, gotten a
traffic ticket, or being unable to accomplish a homework task). The same material might also not be reported to the therapist because of “forgetting,” a process
that might be more unconscious (“Didn’t I tell you about Jim breaking up with
me? I thought that I did.”).
A starting point for understanding the impediments to change is to conceptualize the client’s actions as a normal and adaptive response to threat.
Whether the behavior is viewed as an ego defense or as a response to unfamiliar demands, it is unreasonable to expect that an individual will move directly
to change without some level of discomfort, avoidance, or reactance. In point of
fact, an individual who moves too quickly to change may be impulsive, unstable, or labile. The client with a borderline personality disorder may move
quickly from idealization of the therapist (“You are the best.”) to devaluation
(“You are worthless as a therapist.”). Both extremes need to be identified and
addressed directly within the therapy.
Many of our clients have been in therapy at some previous point. If the
previous therapeutic experience has not been successful, it would be essential
for the therapist to first assess what was done in the previous therapy in terms
of the focus, direction, content, timing, cadence, and style of the therapy.
What was the client’s view of the therapist (both personally and professionally)? What strategies and techniques worked in the therapy and what was left
undone or poorly done? How well did the client think that the therapy met
their needs? What were, in the client’s view, the most helpful and therapeutic
experiences?
With that information in hand, the therapist can work to alter any and all
the factors emblematic of the negative aspects of the previous therapy so that
the present therapy is experienced as different and not more of the same old
pattern. If the previous therapy was free-floating and unstructured, structure
would offer a different therapeutic experience. If the content revolved around
Impediments to Change 353
a particular issue, shifting to a variant of that issue, or even a different issue
could be helpful. Different examples could be useful. The goal is to make the
present therapy a new experience and opportunity for change. If the previous
therapy was successful and fulfilling of the client’s needs, but ended due to outside forces (loss of insurance or the therapist leaving the agency), the therapist
can try to follow and use what worked before. For the previously “therapized”
client, the current therapist must be creative in finding new directions or foci.
Bordin’s Model of the Working Alliance
Bordin’s model (1979) of the working alliance emphasizes the agreement about
the goals and tasks of therapy and the establishment of a positive, interpersonal
bond between client and therapist as being crucial to the success of therapy.
Many of the identified impediments to therapy appear to be related to difficulties in the establishment of the working alliance. Lack of clarity in the definition of problems and related goals, lack of precision in the definition of the
tasks of treatment, and confusion about the division of labor in treatment and
the failure to establish a collaborative, goal-directed relationship can severely
limit the effectiveness of treatment.
We have found it useful to separate the working alliance into its component
parts and to deal with them in a more focused manner. We use the term working alliance or therapeutic alliance to mean the therapeutic goals and contract
between therapist and client. This contract or treatment plan needs to be explicit and negotiated early in the therapy. In this way, the goals of therapy will
be clear, as well as the direction of the therapy, the potential time line for therapy, the elements of the therapy, the strategies that might be used in the therapy, and the people who might be called on to contribute to the therapy (family
members, significant others).
We use the term therapeutic bond to refer to the relationship between the
therapist and the client. For some clients the relationship may be the central
focus. For other clients, the alliance may be far more important. The focus on
one does not, in any way, ignore or diminish the importance of the other. It may
be a question of which will be the ascendant feature at a particular point in
therapy. If a client were to come into an emergency facility with suicidal
ideation or after a suicide gesture or attempt, the therapeutic relationship may
be secondary to the need to act immediately and directly on helping the client
toward safety. Clients who need emotional support to accomplish their goals
may need far more of the therapeutic bond to provide the environment for
change.
Impediments to Treatment and Change
Some impediments to treatment may not reside within the person of the therapist or of the client. Cultural, familial, social, and interpersonal factors may all
354 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
contribute to difficulties encountered in the treatment setting. In addition, factors related to the health and medical well-being of the client may contribute to
the degree of difficulty encountered in attempting to implement a structured,
planned intervention. As an extension of Bordin’s work, we identify four broad
areas that may interfere with, or even halt therapeutic progress: client factors,
therapist factors, environmental factors, and factors related to the problems or
pathology that brings the individual to seek therapy.
Client Factors
These are cognitive, affective, or behavioral aspects of the client, and may even
be seen as typical of their style. These characteristics may be clear, obvious, and
overt and not easily missed. Or, these characteristics may be far more limited
and evident only under stress, or when the individual experiences threat. They
may include the following:
• The client lacks skills to comply with the therapeutic requirements or
tasks.
• Previous treatment experience, often of failure, has produced negative
expectations or cynicism.
• The client fears that others will be hurt or impacted in a negative way by
the changes produced in therapy.
• There is secondary gain from maintaining symptoms, for the client or significant others.
• The client fears the experience of change or being “different.”
• The client lacks compelling reasons to change.
• The client has a generally negative set toward therapy.
• The client has limited ability for self-monitoring of thoughts, feelings, and
behavior.
• The client has limited or poor ability to monitor the responses and reactions of others.
• The client has a demanding or self-centered interpersonal style.
• The client has a low tolerance for frustration and expects progress to be
effortless and rapid.
• The client perceives being in therapy as a loss of social status and feels
stigmatized.
Therapist Factors
As active participants, therapists bring their own values, skills, and motivation(s) to the treatment endeavor. All therapists, no matter which gender or
how many years of experience or training, potentially contribute to the therapeutic roadblocks. If you doubt this, you need only peruse the public record of
state licensing board disciplinary actions for evidence of misdeeds by licensed
psychologists. Not all the clinician-based roadblocks are at the level of misdeed.
Impediments to Change 355
Some are factors of experience and training. The therapist contributions to the
impediments include the following:
• The therapist lacks skills.
• The client and therapist maintain congruent distortions.
• The client has been poorly socialized by the therapist to the expectations
of the therapy or of a particular treatment model.
• The therapist is unable to build or communicate an active and effective
collaboration or working alliance. Essentially, the therapist has not gotten
informed consent and agreement with therapy goals.
• The therapist and the client are attempting to operate from an impaired or
limited database.
• The therapist has therapeutic narcissism.
• The therapist’s timing of interventions is poor.
• The therapist has limited skills but lacks experience.
• The therapy goals are unstated, unrealistic, or vague.
• The therapist fails to build and maintain the therapeutic bond.
• The therapist has a lack of understanding of the norms and of the developmental process.
• The therapist has unrealistic expectations of client.
Environmental Factors
We all live within a subgroup, a group, and a society. Each entity will have expectations and demands for conformity, allegiance, and contributions from the
client. Sometimes these demands will be in conflict; other times they may be in
direct opposition one to the other. The client’s difficulty may come from the
delicate balancing act of trying to meet the demands of many masters, and not
being able to do it. These psychosocial stressors would, ideally, be coded on the
DSM-IV-TR Axis IV. The demands of the environment could include:
• Environmental stressors that preclude change.
• Significant others (SOs) who foil or sabotage therapy.
• Agency or institutional reinforcement of pathology and illness through
compensation and benefits.
• Cultural opposition to help seeking.
• The maintenance of system homeostasis.
• Gross family pathology.
• Unrealistic demands on client by self and family members.
• Unrealistic demands on client by institutions.
• Financial factors that may limit the opportunities for change.
• Lack of resources or support from the environment.
• Resources with conflicting agendas for the client.
356 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Problem or Pathology Factors
Clients bring with them a plethora of factors. Some are related to the client’s
personal style as listed earlier. Other factors are indicative or diagnostic of the
client’s problems and pathology. These factors may be found in Axes I and II and
be part of the criteria for disorders coded on these axes. These could include:
• Rigid cognitive style.
• Significant medical or physiological problems.
• Trust impairments.
• Impulsivity and poor executive control.
• Cognitive impairment, confusion, or limited cognitive ability.
• Social isolation or alienation.
• Symptom profusion.
• Extreme dependence.
• Ongoing self devaluation.
• Limited energy for change.
• Substance misuse.
Client Factors
Lack of Skill to Comply with the Therapeutic Requirements or Regimen
Therapists cannot assume that every client has developed the skills to effectively perform a particular behavior or sequence of behaviors. For many
clients, their difficulty in therapy will parallel their inability to cope with life
stressors. Both may be based on inadequately developed skills. These skill
deficits may be broad (overall social skills) or more discrete (making eye contact while speaking to another person).
For many individuals, their present skill set has been adequate for getting
by in familiar and highly structured areas of life experience. In a novel situation, however, they have far more difficulty and may avoid it, when possible,
withdraw from it, or fail to meet its requirements. If they are overtly unsuccessful at coping, they may experience such a high level of discomfort that they
will avoid future encounters. Because these clients may never have developed
skills, or not developed them to the level necessary for adequate functioning,
the therapist may need to teach particular skills to help them move along in
therapy and thereby in life.
The assessment protocol must include an evaluation of the skill repertoire
of the individual including behavioral skills (e.g., acting in particular ways
when confronted with particular stimuli); cognitive skills (e.g., being able to
evaluate or dispute thoughts); situational skills (e.g., being able to leave situations that are potentially damaging); and affective skills (e.g., being able to control emotion). If there are skill deficits, the therapy must include the necessary
skill building. Whether this will be a major or minor component of the therapy
depends on the goals of the therapy.
Jim was a 26-year-old graduate student in clinical psychology. He reported for the first day of his clinical practicum wearing a tee shirt, cutoff jeans,
Impediments to Change 357
and sandals. When asked by the agency’s director of clinical training (DCT) why
he was dressed that way, Jim replied that it was a hot day and that this is what
he generally wore to school. When the DCT informed Jim that the agency had a
dress code for warm weather, Jim argued that he was the same person no matter what he wore and that dress codes were foolish and without value. When it
was emphasized to Jim that the dress code was not open for discussion or debate, he demanded to know what the DCT expected him to wear. The DCT
identified the sentence in the practicum student’s manual that stated that
practicum students were expected to dress “appropriately” and “professionally.” Jim asked what that meant. The DCT informed Jim that he had to wear
shoes, not sandals, long pants, a shirt with a collar and a tie, if he chose. Jim
agreed and left for the practicum student orientation meeting.
The next day Jim appeared at the agency wearing black shoes, yellow
socks, brown pants, a red shirt, and a green tie. On being informed of Jim’s outfit, the DCT called him into his office and demanded, “What is this? What sort
of outfit do you call this? Is this from a clown catalogue?” Jim seemed stunned.
He stammered, “I did what you said. I am wearing everything that you said that
I should.”
The DCT stopped and considered the following: Was Jim’s outfit the result
of passive aggression or simply a lack of social skills? He decided on the latter.
He asked Jim, “How did you choose this particular set of clothes to wear?” Jim
responded, “I guess I just took what was on the top of the clothes pile or what
was clean. What’s wrong with this?”
The DCT replied, “There are too many colors. They clash. In the future,
choose one or two colors and stay with them.” In a particularly poignant and
academic manner Jim asked, “Is there a book that I can read on how to dress?”
The next day, Jim came to the agency wearing black pants, black socks,
black shoes and a black shirt. He sought out the DCT to show his adherence to
one color.
Jim’s dress issues were the result of a lack of skills. By the end of the year,
with input from other students, Jim’s dress was far more conventional.
Ideas about Therapy Based on Previous Therapy Failure
Clients entering therapy will carry with them, perhaps in an overriding way,
their experience in a previous therapy or the cumulative impact of therapeutic
experiences that they view as failures. When clients have cognitions of failing
to make changes in thought or behavior, the therapist needs to help the client
carefully examine their ideas of what succeeded in the past, what they see as
failed, and what they would like to accomplish in the present work. It is essential that the therapist does not label the previous therapy as failing, but rather
as clients’ further attempts or steps taken toward succeeding. Examining the
client’s underlying assumptions and reactions to the previous therapy will be an
important first step in building the new therapy.
An aspect of failure that inhibits many clients is their rumination about
the previous therapist’s reactions and if the previous therapist considered that
the client did the therapy “right.” Rather than trying to interpret the previous
therapist’s reaction, it would be far more adaptive to examine the client’s views
of others. If the client anticipates receiving harsh criticism, anger, expressions
of disappointment, or other aversive responses from the therapist, it may be
358 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
useful to bring the question into the here-and-now. Does the client expect criticism and failure in the present therapy? Do they wait for the inevitable criticism? Are they waiting for their pink slip firing them from therapy... again?
It is important for the therapist to respond to this impediment without
being punitive or authoritarian and instead to work with the client to understand what blocked compliance. However, it is also important for the therapist
to be alert for negative anticipation based on the client’s previous experience
with parents and teachers and to address these explicitly if they impede therapy. Homework is an area in which clients’ negative expectations often emerge.
Their fear is that if they fail to do it, they will be thrown out of therapy. Perfectionist clients often anticipate extreme reactions if they don’t do homework
perfectly, and it can be useful to address these anticipations early in therapy.
Usually it is possible to honestly present the client’s task as a “no-lose” situation by pointing out incidents of noncompliance or unexpected results that
provide opportunities for making valuable discoveries. The therapist might follow the first homework assignment with, “One of the nice things about this sort
of approach is that whatever happens, we come out ahead. If you go ahead and
do [the assignment] and it goes the way we expect, great! We’re making progress toward your goals. If you unexpectedly cannot get yourself to do it or if it
does not work out the way we expect, then we have an opportunity to look at
what happened and at your thoughts and feelings to discover more about what
blocks you from your goals. If it goes smoothly, we’re making progress and if it
doesn’t, we’re making a discovery.” For many clients this greatly reduces the
fear of failure.
Ellen, aged 35, came to therapy after having been in therapy for 3 years
with her previous therapist. She had a list of therapists that went back to age
14. At that point, she was referred because of bulimic purging once or twice a
week. The therapist had Ellen placed on an inpatient psychiatry unit for 3
weeks. Afterward, she was seen twice weekly for 3 years. Ellen’s bulimia was
reduced to once a month. She could control it but frequently thought about
purging.
Over the past several years, she sought therapy to get rid of the thinking,
and the monthly binge-purge experience. In seeking the present therapy, she
started with the challenge, “No one has gotten me to stop this. Part of me is
hopeful that this time I will be successful, but part of me believes that this will
fail like all of the other times.”
Fears That Others Will Be Hurt or Impacted in a Negative Way
Sometimes, clients fear that change will have a negative impact or cause damage to significant others. These clients view the result or consequences of their
changing as a catastrophe and need not only to decatastrophize the potential,
but to examine whether there are possible advantages to changing. In many
cases, their negative view is either gained from a significant other or is more
subtly reinforced. A client’s family may see growing independence as a way of
drifting away from the family. The family will then offer the view that the
client’s changes are damaging individuals (“You’re killing me”), the family system (“Your actions are breaking up the family”), or will be damaging to the
client (“You don’t realize how good you have it now”).
Impediments to Change 359
Clients can be helped to examine and discuss (a) the explicit and implicit
messages that they get from others; (b) the content, feeling tone, and timing of
these messages; (c) the implications of what others attribute to the client’s
change; and (d) advantages and disadvantages of change both within and without the system of significant others. As therapists, we should be careful not to
try to challenge the “others” directly as the older (and more powerful) allegiances and alliances may come back to haunt us.
Marsha, aged 19, came to the college counseling center without an appointment. She was in tears and was seen immediately by a staff psychologist.
Marsha opened up quickly and described a crying/screaming/threatening experience at her home. She had agreed with her parents to spend the first year of
college at a local campus of the state university system and to live at home to
“save money.” Her plan for subsequent years was to then transfer to the main
campus of the state university and live on campus.
Money is not the issue, she told the therapist. My folks have lots of money.
We have a big house, my mom and dad both drive Mercedes, and we have a
full-time housekeeper. “My mother is afraid that if I were to move out to go to
college, she would never see me again. That I would graduate and move to the
moon. She is very frightened of being alone. She fears that my dad will die, I’ll
be away, and then she’ll have nobody.”
“How does that make you feel” asked the counselor. “Guilty, bad, wrong,
stupid, ungrateful, and uncaring” said Marsha. “If I go away to college, my
mother will die. I just know that she will waste away and die.”
Secondary Gain from Maintaining Symptoms
In some situations, clients may not change because of the gain that accrues
from continuing their dysfunctional thinking or behavior. In the case of suicidal
behavior or ideation, this can force family members to treat the client gently,
not put any pressure on the client, avoid confrontation, and generally allow the
client to do whatever the person wishes, rather than increase the suicidal potential. This gain may be gotten from family, friends, employers, or other individuals with whom the client has interaction.
The client needs to look at the primary loss that goes into achieving their
secondary gain. When possible, the client needs to be helped to obtain their
gain in other ways. If the gain is powerful enough, therapists may find themselves stymied in the head-to-head confrontation. The Socratic dialogue is most
helpful at this point. This directive dialogue can help the client to find a perspective that is far more powerful at limiting the perceived gain than simply
being told by the therapist to consider the liabilities.
Allen, aged 44, lived at home with his parents. He did not work and he
slept until 11:00 A.M. each day. Allen had no responsibilities at home. His
mother cooked all meals, cleaned up afterward, and washed his clothes. When
his father tried to have Allen do things around the house (gardening, cleaning)
Allen refused stating, “I’m not your slave.”
When asked to contribute money to the house for food, Allen refused stating, “It’s your job to take care of me. You abused me as a kid and now you have
to pay it back.” When pressed, Allen would run to the basement of the house,
stand on a chair, place a rope around a beam in the basement and then around
360 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
his neck and threaten to hang himself. His parents were so frightened of his
possible suicide that they gave in to all his requests.
Allen sounds like a 13-year-old in the body of a 44-year-old. This being
how the therapist saw the situation, the recommendation was for family therapy to help Allen but also to try to maintain the contingencies for his behavior
at home by working with his parents as one would do with an adolescent.
Fear of Change or Becoming Different
For some clients, change means giving up ideas, beliefs of behaviors that they
see as inimical to their survival. This may seem paradoxical because it is their
thinking that keeps them stuck. In reality, these clients fear any change because
of the unknown and therefore threatening element. The familiarity of their
pain is preferable to the uncertainty of a new mode of thinking or behaving.
More simply, they believe “The devil that you know is better than the devil that
you don’t know.”
As with many fears, the first approach is to gather as much data as possible, including the client’s perception of the effort needed to change, the possibility of successful change, the impact of change, the client’s ability to cope
with change, and the price that the client believes must be paid for change.
Henry, 52, came to therapy at the referral of his physician. He was told
that he had to slow down and reduce the stress on his body (especially his
heart) from his 16-hour workdays, 6 or 7 days a week. Henry rarely took vacations and spent very little time with his wife or children. This had been his
pattern since he was 12. He worked a paper route, cleaned up in a meat market at the end of the day, and worked nights in his father’s pharmacy while
studying and graduating with a scholarship to college. At college, he went to
classes, worked in the university library, and worked 2 nights a week in a
local pharmacy.
His expressed concern was that everyone (his wife, the doctor) was trying
to turn him into a “typical working slob.” Who could be successful working 9
to 5? He credited his financial and professional success to his long hours of
working without distraction. He did not know what it would be like to work
less.
Therapy focused on his incrementally and experimentally reducing various activities. The goal was not to stop, but to evaluate what would happen if
he turned down the intensity of his activity and allowed some time to relax and
connect with others.
Lack of Compelling Reasons to Change
Clients may be experiencing some discomfort with the impact of their behavior,
yet are still comfortable with the behavior. Often, clients see small parts of the
problems but view these issues as “part of them,” or as too small to bother with
in therapy. There is no compelling reason to consider a personal change, and
there may even be strong reasons the client wishes to avoid change. Clients may
also come for therapy under protest. The therapy may be mandated as part of a
legal penalty (“go to therapy or go to jail”) or coerced by family members (“If
you don’t get help, I’m leaving you”). For child and adolescent clients, the referral will come from the school or parents (“You are in trouble and must
change what you are doing, now”).
Impediments to Change 361
In these circumstances, clients come to therapy with the message that the
therapist is an agent of the referring (or coercive) individual, whether that individual is parent, spouse, judge, probation officer, guidance counselor, or
teacher. This sets up a negative and possibly adversarial situation prior to the
first therapy session.
Helping clients to identify the advantages and disadvantages of being involved in therapy can help generate motivation and reasons to consider change.
A second technique would be to have the client examine and to entertain the
possibility of some value to changing, no matter how small that possibility
might be.
Clients often accept identifying the value, gain, profit, advantage, merit,
desirability, or benefit no matter how minimal. The motivation can be extrinsic
or intrinsic. The extrinsic motive may be to stay out of jail, to have a parent or
probation officer “get off of their back,” or to profit in financial ways. The goal
of the intervention is to have the client agree to therapy for whatever period of
time is appropriate or mandated. The question the therapist asks is, “How might
this work to your advantage?” Or, “How can therapy work in your enlightened
self-interest?”
A final technique is to work in therapy time modules. A therapy module
can be from 1 to 10 sessions. This strategy removes the therapy from the realm
of forever and makes it into a more proximal and workable time frame. The
goals for each module are specified and limited.
Erik, aged 15, was brought to therapy by his parents in an attempt to help
him be more cooperative at home. Erik did not want to be in therapy, had little
to say in therapy, and believed that the therapist was part of the adult conspiracy to punish him for speaking his mind. Erik’s first action was to shock the
therapist by his language. Every other word Erik uttered seemed to be a fourletter one, interspersed liberally with other sexual references. Rather than challenging Erik (“Watch your mouth young man”) or joining him (“Sure, I can see
that coming here is a f g waste of your f g time and f g effort,”) the therapist stated the obvious. “Speaking this way at home has the goal
and effect of getting your parents upset and annoyed. It won’t have that effect
or impact on me.” Erik eventually slowed down his attempts to upset the therapist when the therapist kept asking, “What can I do to help get your folks off
your back?”
General Negative Set toward Therapy
Often clients seem to have a “bad attitude,” or “a very negative view.” What is
labeled as attitudinal is often an issue of negative set. The negative set might be
manifested directly as “Yes-but” behavior by being agreeable and then quickly
disqualifying whatever the therapist says, or directly arguing with the therapist
on issues both large and small.
When dealing with a client with a negative set, it is essential that the therapist refrain from being drawn in debates, arguments, or tautological discussions that do not enhance the therapy. Given the negative set, the therapist can
help to develop a positive cognitive set in otherwise resistant clients. The protocol involves several steps.
First, use Socratic questioning rather than interpretation. This involves a
process of guided discovery. By the careful placement of simple closed-ended
362 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
questions, the client can be moved slowly toward a more positive view. While
the temptation may be to use open-ended questions to keep the therapy
moving, the closed-end questioning keeps stress low in the interview.
The client only has to answer relatively easy questions. This may preclude
having the client develop an opening for ongoing venting of their upset with
the world.
In framing the questions, the therapist has to be careful to state them so
that the answer is affirmative. The rule is that the therapist does not move
ahead unless and until they receive an affirmative response:
Poor question: Do you want to be here?
Better question: Are there many other places you would rather be?
Poor question: Do you believe that they treated you (fairly; well; appropriately)?
Better question: I would guess that you believe that they treated you (unfairly;
poorly; inappropriately) is that so?
If the client offers a negative response, immediately reframe it so that the
new question will elicit a positive response:
Therapist: “Do you think that you had any responsibility for what happened?”
Client: “No. None.”
Therapist: “So what happened was, in your view, due to what others did. Is that
what you are saying?”
The basic idea is that the content of the interview with the negative client
is secondary to the purpose of reducing resistance and increasing rapport.
When this technique is used, clients will see the therapist as more on their side,
more agreeable, and less threatening. Once the negative set is shifted, more traditional therapeutic tools can be used.
Maria came from a home where she was always questioned, and every
choice that she made was challenged. She married Brad who (not surprisingly)
questioned and challenged every choice that she made. She worked in an office
at the university where her boss questioned and challenged every choice that
she made. Her children, modeling their father, questioned and challenged every
choice that she made or rule that she set or tried to enforce.
Her referral for therapy came from her family physician, who was treating
her pharmacologically for depression. Despite her physician’s encouragement,
Maria came to therapy with a negative set which was voiced as, “There is nothing that anyone can do to help me. I’m beyond help. I can’t do anything right. I
have always been this way and I deserve what I get. That’s what everyone says,
my folks, my husband, even my kids.”
The initial focus of therapy was to use the questioning with a positive response to help Maria to begin to relate more positively in therapy, to begin to
chip away at the negative cognitive set, and have her see that there might be possibilities for change in her life.
Impediments to Change 363
Limited Ability for Self-Monitoring of Thoughts, Feelings, and Behavior
Individuals may see the flaws and foibles of others but be blind to their own.
The difficulty or, in some cases, the inability to self-monitor will often cause
major problems in life, and be a major stumbling block for therapy. Being either
unaware of the need to self-monitor or unable to self-monitor can have a range
of effects for the individual. These individuals may say or do things that others
view as strange or bizarre. By virtue of not self-monitoring, they may find
themselves in deep difficulty with work, or with interpersonal or intrapersonal
issues. By not attending to their internal or external environments, they may,
in the words of the popular saying, “be up to their eyeballs in alligators.” The
inability to accurately self-evaluate can lead to depressive affect and behavior
that in turn distorts clients’ ability to accurately self-monitor. When depressed,
they do not self-monitor but rather self-devaluate with negative appraisals
and attributions.
Clients who do not self-monitor their more grandiose movements may
find themselves out on a limb by virtue of involving themselves in projects
or schemes that are far beyond their ability to satisfy. Rather than selfdevaluation, this client’s reflections are more self-serving and preserving of
their positive self-image, even if reality is underrepresented.
The broad goal of intervention is to help clients develop a productive selfmonitoring style. A major part of that goal involves the development of an observant style. If an individual has surveyed the scene and still decides to move
ahead with a project or action, we can assume that it is not necessarily their
self-monitoring that is flawed, but their problem-solving ability.
Jim, the psychology student described earlier, had to self-monitor what he
wore, not merely wearing what was available or clean. He had to plan ahead for
those days that he was at the practicum site. What started as a way of avoiding
problems became a more global attempt to fit into a new professional role.
Limited or Poor Ability to Monitor the Responses and Reactions of Others
Monitoring of others is a problem that often goes hand in hand with poor selfmonitoring. These clients look at others, may even be preoccupied with them,
but actually see little. Their response to others is based on images, projections,
and distortions rather than a data-based assessment. Others appear to be
brighter, more attractive, more skilled, and so on. All other relationships must
be more rewarding than any they have or might have. Others, quite simply, are
not seen in terms of their realistic human needs, limits, and vulnerabilities.
Interventions, both in the sessions and as homework, need to focus on
practice in observing others. This may take place as an observer in a mall,
restaurant, or store. Subtly and carefully observing others is good practice. Observing and estimating the specific response of significant others can be a useful homework assignment. Even gauging and predicting the therapist’s reaction
to certain stimuli can be used. Group work can be useful to help clients with
this problem.
Gretchen had become convinced that she lived in a different social world
than everyone else. She avoided going out very much because she expected
people to look at her “funny” because she was alone in public. She believed that
most people had lots of friends and relatives to share activities with and that it
364 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
was abnormal to do anything alone. When she had to travel about on her own,
she felt very conspicuous and perceived herself as a focus of attention, no matter how quietly she behaved. Examining her perceptions in the context of a
therapy session had little impact on Gretchen’s degree of conviction in her view
of self and the world. Gretchen’s therapist proposed an experiment to test some
of these perceptions by meeting for a session at a coffee shop. They arrived separately, and the therapist observed Gretchen for the first 15 minutes as she ordered coffee and sat alone reading a book. Then the therapist joined Gretchen
and together they discussed her experiences and observed others in the coffee
shop. Gretchen wondered whether people were looking at her funny, but she
had not actually seen anyone staring. The therapist offered a reliability check to
this perception with her observation that Gretchen has drawn no particular attention from the other patrons. Gretchen surveyed the scene and observed an
assortment of other people in the coffee shop, some in pairs, a couple of
groups, and several people enjoying their beverage alone, disconfirming her notion that it was abnormal to go anywhere in public alone.
A Demanding Interpersonal Style
Highly demanding or self-centered interpersonal behavior may reflect a narcissistic personality style. This needs to be differentiated from a diagnosis of clinical
narcissism, which is a more pervasive and severe impairment in interpersonal
relationships. The narcissistic style causes these clients to be so self-involved that
any attempt to have them look at others or at themselves is met with resistance.
The reaction is typically framed as, “The problem can’t be me,” or “Why would
you (or anyone) expect so much from me.” What is problematic is that the demanding style is often reinforced by having others accede to their wishes or
demands.
It is essential for the therapist to set clear limits early in therapy. Once set,
these limits must be maintained until restated or purposely renegotiated and
changed. The use of self-instruction and assessing with the client the value of
the demanding style can be discussed.
By virtue of luck, personal charm, good looks, and a demanding style, Sal
had become used to getting his needs met without question. He came to therapy as an alternative to jail after he was caught and convicted of selling stolen
property. Sal maintained that he did not know that the property was stolen, but
despite his charm, he was convicted. His style in therapy was to ask for favors:
“Do I really have to come every week? After all, if I come every other week, the
judge wouldn’t know, right?” He smiled, complimented the office décor, the
therapist’s suit, and the therapist’s credentials. He voiced how lucky he was to
be seeing the therapist. When his charm did not work, Sal pouted: “How can
you do this to me? From what I remember from school, therapists are supposed
to meet their client’s needs.” When this did not work, Sal switched back to
charm. When this did not work, Sal became sad because he was being “misunderstood” by the therapist.
Low Tolerance for Frustration and Unrealistic Expectations
Clients may have unrealistic expectations of therapy and possible therapy progress. When the expectations are not met, clients may blame themselves or the
therapist for the lack of progress. They may respond to their frustration by
Impediments to Change 365
withdrawing, withholding from the therapeutic collaboration, or terminating
therapy.
If, at the outset of therapy, there are discrete goals and realistic change criteria, the progress of therapy can be assessed and monitored. Without these,
the client can easily see no progress and may prematurely foreclose the effort.
Bill’s expectation or demand was that the therapy should take no more
than 10 sessions. He had read an article about therapy and it stated that more
than 10 sessions was unnecessary. To support his argument, he pointed to the
limited sessions that were being paid for by insurance companies. “After all,” he
said, “if these multimillion dollar companies have studied therapy and concluded that it should only take ten sessions, I expect that from you.”
Therapy Perceived as a Loss of Social Status
For some individuals, being in therapy, for whatever reason, is a mark of lowered status. Being in therapy is the mark of being “sick,” “disturbed,” “weird,”
“a nut case,” or “crazy.” Given the belief that being in therapy equates with
being flawed, it would follow that fighting therapy (or the therapist), leaving, or
avoiding therapy makes one less flawed. This is especially true in working with
children and adolescents who are invariably sent, brought, or threatened into
therapy. They then see the therapist as another adult, which emphasizes their
helplessness.
Clients can be helped to reframe their position as one of taking greater
control. In fact, the goal of the therapy will be for them to take control over
those areas and circumstances that are reasonable, and to work at coping with
those situations that are less controllable. The therapy must be framed to raise
their position rather than to indicate their helplessness or low position. It is in
this regard that the therapeutic collaboration, the therapeutic bond, and a clear
working alliance are essential.
Maria, described earlier, saw her client status as proving that there was
something wrong with her. It was essential for her to fight the therapy and the
therapist to prove that she would not submit in this arena, too. By reframing
the therapy as a way for Maria to gain skills that she could use at home, with
her folks, with her boss, and with her children, she could agree to be part of the
collaboration. The metaphor that was helpful for Maria was that therapy was a
cast and a crutch for a broken leg. Both would be useful until there was sufficient healing of broken bones. These would not be needed when her leg was
strong enough to support her.
Therapist Factors
Lack of Therapist Skill
Just as clients come into therapy with a particular set of skills, so, too, do therapists. Because of limited experience with a particular client problem or population, the therapist may not be best equipped to work with a particular client.
The therapist working within the context of an agency or hospital setting may
call in colleagues for consultation on the case or seek supervision on a particular case or problem. It is incumbent on therapists to constantly develop, enhance, and upgrade their skills through additional training. Postgraduate
courses, continuing education programs, seminars, workshops, or institutes are
366 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
part of the professional growth of all therapists. If the therapist’s skills are a
poor match with the client’s problem, transfer to another therapist is the ethical
indication.
Students often have the disadvantage of seeing clients with extensive histories of psychological problems. This occurs at a time when the student is just
learning about the range of problems and skills. However, the development of
professional skills is a career-long endeavor, and students can expect to continually expand their fund of knowledge and range of skills. There is a spectrum of
skill development efforts that professionals can use for the duration of their career, from student to seasoned practitioner. At one end of the spectrum is information seeking. This can involve reading of texts or other books, or searching the
literature and Internet for information. Another tool is self-supervision where therapists review their session notes and tapes, and do their own supervision or consultation. Peer consultation can be useful when therapists meet with colleagues to
support and instruct each other. A therapist confronted by a particular client type
or client problem may seek professional consultation on an as-needed basis for a single meeting or for a limited number of consultation sessions. The therapist may
also choose an ongoing professional supervision or consultation where the discussion
is not limited but part of an overall professional growth experience.
For students, there is always required ongoing professional supervision that is
part of professional training requirements and necessary to avoid unlawful
practice without a license and potential risks to the client. Where the supervisor’s experience is limited, additional professional consultation might be sought for
a specific area of concern. For many psychologists, an integrative approach is
used. This includes professional supervision, peer consultation, and selfsupervision. Finally, therapists who are experiencing difficulty in dealing with
a particular client, client type, or client problem, may find that personal therapy
helps them cope, and consultation on risk management may be advisable.
Congruent Distortions Maintained by Client and Therapist
Therapists’ blind spots may be very destructive to the therapeutic process in
that they generally incline the therapist to accept the client’s dysfunctional beliefs without question. If a client and therapist share a particular dysfunctional
idea (e.g., “everything is hopeless and cannot change”; “all men or women cannot be trusted”), it will bode poorly for the therapy. This sharing of an idea or
belief can result in the therapist buying into the client’s hopeless ideas and beliefs, not testing these beliefs, and even encouraging them.
Therapists must be exquisitely tuned into their personal life issues. Without this awareness, they may be blindsided by a client’s revelation or comment.
Whether this awareness comes from personal therapy or self-examination is of
lesser consequence. Whenever we accept the client’s statements as being unassailable we as therapists surrender our ability to help. While it is always appropriate to empathize with the client, the therapist must be able to go further and
ask, “What are we going to do about it?”
Sue, aged 27, sought therapy for her depression. She described her depression to her therapist Alicia as based on the fact that despite everything that
she and her husband were doing, Sue could not get pregnant. She described her
desperate wish for a baby, a desire that she stated went back to her adolescence.
Impediments to Change 367
“Being a mother has always been more important than school, degrees, jobs, or
anything else.”
In supervision, Alicia described her goals of helping Sue to (a) come to
terms with her inability to conceive a child, (b) view herself as a woman despite her inability to conceive, (c) not be angry at her husband for his inability
to help her conceive, (d) reduce her anger at her husband for not understanding
the depth of her upset and trying to placate her. When the supervisor tried to
gather more data from Alicia about everything that Sue had done, Alicia stated,
“She’s done everything!”
“So, the fertility clinic here at the university has written her off?” The supervisor asked.
“I guess so” replied Alicia. When the supervisor persisted, Alicia became
angry and told him that she did not expect a man to fully understand Sue’s loss.
Alicia thought the supervisor was being sexist and ignorant of the issues, and
that she (Alicia) did not want to continue the discussion of Sue. When the supervisor persisted and asked Alicia to stay with the issue just a while longer,
Alicia said, “I can’t.” She began crying and after a period of soothing revealed
the following. Her two children were adopted. This was not known to her peers
or coworkers. Alicia was unable to get pregnant, an issue that ultimately
caused stress in her marriage and contributed to the ending of that relationship.
She had never questioned whether Sue had sought fertility treatment but went
immediately to trying to soothe Sue.
When Alicia questioned Sue further, she discovered that Sue had never
sought fertility treatment. Alicia and Sue shared the idea, “I cannot ever get
pregnant,” that might have been true for Alicia but not necessarily for Sue.
Failure to Adequately Socialize Client to Treatment
Clients who do not understand what is expected of them will have difficulty complying with the therapeutic regimen. It is essential that the therapist assess the
level of understanding of the goals and guidelines for therapy generally and for the
specific model throughout the therapy work. Often clients’ very problems may impair their ability to listen and understand. Hundreds of self-help books are available but these rarely if ever explain the role of being a client. The therapist cannot
assume that having read books about therapy provides adequate socialization to
therapy generally, or to a particular model specifically. Further, there may be
proactive interference because of ideas from readings or previous therapy. Clients
who have been in therapy have, ideally, been socialized to that previous therapy
model. They will continue to use the same strategies and approach to therapy and
to life in general unless and until they are taught to respond differently.
Milt, aged 66, had psychoanalysis sessions 3 times per week for 14 years
with the same analyst. When the analyst died, Milt spent the next year and half
shopping for a new analyst to replace his lost friend. “He knew everything about
me, I called him by his first name, sent him Christmas cards.” After an unsuccessful search where Milt either interviewed therapists or started trial therapy,
he decided that his analyst could not be replaced and that he would have to settle for a “lesser” therapy. This brought him to a therapist that had been recommended highly as an expert in the treatment of depression. After a two-session
interview of the therapist, Milt decided to enter treatment. He reported that the
368 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
reason that he sought therapy over 15 years earlier was to treat his depression.
When asked if that was done in the analytic work Milt said, “No, but I liked
going.”
The new therapist was careful to not, in any way, question what was done
in the previous therapy. When Milt came to each new session, he would start to
engage in free association. When it was pointed out that this new therapy used
a more focused approach, Milt heard that as critical of his previous therapy.
Milt and the new therapist negotiated an agreement to put free association on
the agenda as the first item. This would last for no more than ten minutes, and
that was followed by agenda setting and a more focused approach to therapy. It
is the therapist’s job to make sure that the client is aware of the requirements,
expectations, special circumstances, and goals of the therapy and to negotiate a
satisfactory working alliance.
Inability to Build an Active and Effective Collaboration
Collaboration is an essential ingredient for all psychotherapy. If the client and
therapist do not have a good working alliance, it would follow that the client
may be less motivated to work with the therapist, do homework, follow the
therapist’s direction, or generally work toward making changes. The lack of collaboration, if not based on socialization difficulty or the skill of the therapist,
may be due to the client’s thoughts about cooperation or collaboration. Certain
clients may actively thwart the therapist. This type of passive-aggressive behavior may be motivated by any of a variety of client ideation; issues of control, entitlement, fear, competition or displaced anger may all cause difficulty in the
therapy. This client may be directly challenging or more covertly avoidant as in
the classic “yes, but” response.
A therapist in training asked for advice in handling a client’s noncompliance with behavioral experiments designed to reduce the client’s perfectionism. The client’s goals for therapy were to resolve some relatively minor marital
problems, but the therapist saw the client’s perfectionism and the stress and job
dissatisfaction that resulted from it as more significant. Rather than discussing
this issue with the client and reaching an agreement on the goals of therapy,
the therapist had unilaterally begun working on perfectionism and this led to
the noncompliance.
Collaboration involves both the therapist and the client and either of them
can disrupt it. If the client feels that he or she has no voice in how therapy proceeds, either because this is indeed the case or because of his or her beliefs and
expectations, this is likely to interfere with collaboration and produce problems
with compliance. It is important for the therapist to actively solicit and value
the client’s input in setting agendas, determining the focus of therapy, and developing homework assignments, particularly with clients who tend to be
unassertive. It is also important to be alert for any client thoughts that could
block collaboration.
An Attempt to Operate from an Impaired or Limited Database
We have stressed that the basis for therapy is the assessment and general collection of data. The therapeutic conceptualization and treatment plan is then data
based. If the therapy is focused on theory without data, the therapy will suffer.
Impediments to Change 369
The therapist may then make major conceptual leaps without a solid footing on
which to base the interventions.
The therapist must always be searching for data and, as a function of the
therapy, help the client to become an effective data collector. Questions such as,
“What value does that have for you?” “What meaning do you give that?”
“What exactly did he say?” or, “Let’s go over the process step by step?” all direct
the client toward collecting and evaluating the data instead of responding to bits
and pieces of it. In working with individuals or couples, an effective data-gathering question subsequent to something being said or done within the session
is, “What just happened right here?” This directs the client(s) to the here-andnow.
Homework, an important part of the overall therapy, is designed to help
the client gather data.
Ray, aged 42 came to therapy as a facet of his ongoing difficulty with his
wife. She had returned to school to pursue an associate’s degree in nursing.
When Ray and Judith married 20 years earlier, she dropped out of school to
work at home and to raise their two children. They were now aged 17 and 15,
and Judith felt that it was a good time for her to return to school.
Ray, on the other hand, was used to having his dinner ready for him when
he came home from work and was very upset that Judith wasn’t around. She
was in classes, studying, and involved in clinical experiences. A crisis emerged
when Judith informed Ray that she and several other students would be funded
by the college to attend the state nursing conference a month hence. Ray came
for therapy very upset. “What am I to do? I’ll be home alone.” For the 20 years
of their marriage, the only time that Ray and Judith had spent a night away
from each other was when she gave birth.
Ray’s thoughts were like a runaway train. “She’ll like going to the conference. Now she’ll start going to all of these conferences. There are many
throughout the year. She’ll be away a lot.” When asked if that was what Judith
said, that she was going to go to one conference a month, and that she would
be away a minimum of a weekend a month, Ray said no. “She’s going to this
conference.” This observation immediately slowed the racing of his thoughts
and the distress in his mood. Looking at the data had a marked impact on slowing his runaway emotional train.
Therapeutic Narcissism
An issue that can be a major impediment to change is what we term “therapeutic narcissism.” This results from therapists being so taken with themselves and
their therapeutic approach that they are blinded to the need for greater humanity, empathy, and depth.
Therapeutic narcissism may take the form of telling rather than asking
clients how they feel. It may show up in several other ways: deciding what the
client needs without consulting the client, believing that change should take
less time than it does, setting goals for change that are distal and grandiose, or
labeling clients as resistant for continuing to believe the dysfunctional ideas
taught to them by parents and significant others. Therapeutic narcissists believe
they are more powerful than they really are, smarter than they really are, that
they know what the client is “really” thinking, that they never have to accept
370 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
the germ of truth in a client’s negative comments and that simply spending time
in their aura should be therapeutic.
Pat was a psychology intern. He was very bright and very verbal. He
claimed to be an advocate for a short-term rational emotive behavior (REBT)
model of treatment that used debate and persuasion as a major therapeutic
tool. What was clear about Pat’s work was that it was short term. Most of his
clients were seen for one session. In that session Pat would quickly identify the
problem, enter a debate with the client and by the end of the session, the client
would admit that Pat was right. The client rarely returned for another session.
Pat’s view was that if they did not return than they were either cured or not
ready to hear the “truth.”
Poor Timing of Interventions
Untimely interventions may cause clients to miss the importance or relevance
of the therapeutic work, and thereby appear to be noncompliant. If the therapist, because of anxiety, tries to push or rush the client, the result may be the
loss of collaboration, the missing of sessions, a misunderstanding of the therapeutic issues, or a premature termination of therapy, a possibly fatal issue with
a hopeless client.
If the therapist misses an opportune moment for an intervention, it is
far better to let it go and return when the moment is once again opportune.
Trying to place an intervention when the timing is wrong may obscure the
value and purpose of an otherwise excellent option. Given that problems and
issues do not disappear in a day, there will be other times for the therapist to
use that tactic.
Chris, a therapy intern, saw an opportunity to use a metaphor in the first
session of the therapy. When he did, the client looked at him and said that he
considered the therapist’s statement condescending and inappropriate. Further,
he thought that an apology was due him. Rather than enter into a power struggle with the client, Chris apologized if anything that he said upset the client.
The same metaphor, used several sessions later, was not only accepted but
prompted the client to say that he had not been ready to see what the therapist
was pointing out in the earlier session.
Lack of Experience
This impediment exists because everyone starting something new is inexperienced. This impediment is unintentional and a standard part of the mental
health training system. The front-line therapists working with the most disturbed and problematic clients may be the therapists in practicum, internship,
or residency settings. The key for the therapist with limited experience is ongoing supervision.
The attainment of the state license in psychology allows the psychologist
to function independently. However, this typically requires at least 1 year of
postdoctoral supervised experience. Even though the newly minted therapist
may feel ready to practice independently, the practitioners overall professional
judgment is developed over time within the more protected confines of supervision and regular consultation.
Impediments to Change 371
Unstated, Unrealistic, or Vague Goals
When the goals of therapy are unstated, unrealistic, or vague, the client may
unknowingly resist the treatment. The client’s problem list must be clearly and
explicitly set out and then ordered in terms of the priorities of the therapy. This
prioritization must be realistic rather than idealistic.
The client who does not understand and agree to what is expected will
have difficulty complying with the therapeutic regimen. It is easy for therapists
to overlook that clients have not understood and accepted their instructions and
explanations. It is important for the therapist to repeatedly solicit feedback
from the client and to encourage the client to raise any concerns and objections, so that therapist and client can develop a shared understanding of the
client’s problems which forms a basis for collaboration and so that it is clear
that the client understands and accepts the homework assignments. Generally
this proves to be sufficient, but when the client holds strong preconceptions
about therapy, the therapist may need to compromise to some extent to facilitate collaboration. This issue also raises problems with informed consent.
Clients must be part of the treatment planning process and informed as to the
goals, strategies, and interventions of the therapy so that they can best comply
rather than being noncompliant out of ignorance.
Inability to Build and Maintain the Therapeutic Bond
In the interest of providing technical interventions and producing rapid results,
many contemporary therapists overlook the importance and primacy of the
therapeutic bond. Just taking time to get to know the client and developing rapport, understanding, and a feeling of familiarity may feel entirely too passive
or underproductive. The eager therapist wants to get going and do something
to help the client. However, the client may feel very uncomfortable with this
technique-oriented therapy and thus be a reluctant participant. There are many
reasons the therapist may lapse in this particular endeavor, including an underestimation of the importance of the therapeutic bond, time pressure from
managed care, difficulty relating to diverse clients, therapeutic narcissism, or
difficulty in tolerating the emotional aspects of this professional role.
Brandon took a very businesslike approach with all his therapy clients.
There is nothing inherently wrong with this strategy, except that Brandon
tended to come across to clients as cold and mechanical. He had little to say to
any individual client, and he focused on writing notes and directing “exercises”
during each session. One client even remarked on a feedback form that Brandon seemed to have a “preprogrammed” approach to therapy that made the experience feel very impersonal. It was no surprise that Brandon had an
extremely short turnaround time in his case-load.
Poor Understanding of Developmental Norms and Developmental Process
An understanding of developmental process including the works of Piaget and
Erikson are essential ingredients in assessment, conceptualization, treatment
planning, and interventions.
Starting with the notion of individuals developing schemas as templates
for understanding and responding to the world, the therapist must focus on the
372 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
stages of cognitive development (sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operations, and formal operations) that can be observed most clearly in the pathological presentations of clients with personality disorders.
Although we expect that adults have achieved the stage of formal operations, this is not always the case. This will assist in the matching of therapeutic
interventions to the client’s level of cognitive development. Having a developmental focus also helps therapists understand the clients’ evolution of schema
in terms of their psychosocial development.
Allen, discussed earlier, was an adult only in years on earth. In every
other way he was an adolescent. In fact, he was an oppositional-defiant adolescent. To try to treat him in individual therapy would be of limited value in that,
like most adolescents, Allen saw his parents as the source of all his frustration.
When Allen was asked why he stayed in such a stressful setting, Allen’s response was, “What do you expect me to do, leave my home?”
Unrealistic Expectations of the Client
One of the subsets of therapeutic narcissism is having expectations of clients
that are more in line with ideal change and out of the realm of reality.
The clients, their families, and even the therapist may believe that a total
change is what is needed for the client. Whether this is realistic based on the
long-term nature of the client’s problems must be an overriding part of the
treatment plan.
Estelle, aged 45, came for therapy to “finally get her life together.” She
described over 30 years of therapy with many therapists in many different
settings. She described episodes of severe depression, multiple hospitalizations, self-injurious behavior, suicide attempts, poor work history, poor school
performance, few relationships, and estrangement from her family. She was
supported by SSI (government subsidy) and lived in a room that she rented by
the week.
Her therapy goals within a year were to have a job that she liked, earn
enough money to buy a house, begin dating, establish a love relationship, possibly adopt “some” children, restore her relationship with her parents and sister, no longer be depressed, and no longer want to hurt herself. The therapist’s
statement, “We can start to work on all of these,” set up an expectation that Estelle had the skills, the ongoing motivation, and the supports to do any of them.
Before moving ahead, it would be prudent for the therapist to assess what is
possible, what is probable, and what may not be realistic.
Environmental Factors
Environmental Stressors Precluding Change
Factors in the client’s environment may maintain their psychopathology. There
may be family schemas that mediate against the client making changes, even if
the family has identified the changes as important. Without malice or intent,
significant others may do things that maintain the client’s dysfunctional and
self-destructive behavior. Clients may get the messages of nonchange either
overtly or covertly. Overtly, clients may be assaulted for going to therapy, as-
Impediments to Change 373
sailed for talking of “private family matters with a stranger,” or teased or stigmatized for being a “psycho” and needing to get their head “shrunk.” Covertly,
the message may be sent by the withdrawal of significant others while clients
are in therapy. In some cases, the clients’ change will make their continuation
within their environment untenable.
Paul was a 25-year-old who had a 6-year heroin habit. He lived at home
with his mother and three brothers. All in his family were heroin addicted. His
mother would boil their “works” (paraphernalia) every night to prevent infection. Paul wanted to join the police department. He had done well in high
school and had avoided the heroin so readily available at home. He knew that
he could not join the police force as a heroin user. He had never been involved
in any drug treatment program nor had he ever been arrested for possession or
use of heroin. He had, on two occasions, stopped using heroin for periods of 3
and 6 months. When asked what got him started again, he replied that it was
impossible to live in his home without someone offering him a “taste.” Although his mother and brothers complimented him on stopping, they also offered him a taste when they scored a particularly good batch of narcotic.
Paul recognized that living at home clean would be too difficult for him
and for his family. To meet his life’s goal of being a police officer, he had to
move away from his home environment.
Therapy Foiled or Sabotaged by Significant Others (SOs)
For many reasons, including expressions of power, the significant others of
clients may sabotage therapy. This can be either directly or indirectly and include not providing transportation for the client or not making agreed-on funds
available for therapy. Other forms of proactive sabotage include the behavior of
the codependent partner who buys alcohol for the alcoholic, buys ice cream by
the gallon for the obese client, or goes shopping for food for the client with
bulimia. This is especially true with children and adolescents. If the parents,
caretakers, and family members are not directly involved, they may actively
sabotage treatment.
Steve, aged 16, was brought to therapy by his mother, Harriet. She announced in the first session that no therapist could deal with Steve. He did not
want to come for therapy and was unwilling to take help that she could offer;
she was generally pessimistic about Steve’s future. Steve had voiced suicidal intent for sometime in the future, had no friends, and was overweight. This was
all said with Steve in the room.
After an initial meeting, Harriet was asked to step into the waiting room
while the therapist spoke with Steve. Harriet was visibly upset. “He’s a minor,
I’m his mother, and I have a duty to be here when you speak to him.” With that
said, Steve began screaming and cursing at her. She seemed embarrassed and
shrugged and left the room, saying, “I think you now see what you’ll be working with.” With his mother out of the room, Steve calmed down. The therapist
set a rule that Harriet was only to come in when invited by the therapist. When
she began to protest, the therapist told her that unless she could agree to the
therapist’s conditions of therapy, he (the therapist) would not start to work
with Steve. Harriet agreed.
374 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Steve was seen for about a dozen sessions. He stated that he liked coming
to see the therapist, was able to calm himself when at home and at school, and
was feeling more hopeful. It was at this point that Harriet called and announced that she had decided that what Steve needed was family therapy and
that she was immediately withdrawing him from work with the therapist. This
was followed by a hushed call by Steve begging the therapist to be allowed to
continue.
Five years later, the therapist received a call from Steve. He had graduated
from a community college, was living across the country from his mother, had
a job, and was feeling “good.” He had called to tell the therapist that the dozen
sessions that he had had given him hope. He had established an identity that
was separate from the dictates of his mother, had a few friends, sought therapy
again, and felt as though he was successful in his life.
Institutional Reinforcement of Illness with Benefits
For many clients, the changes sought in therapy lead to the undesirable consequence of losing funding or benefits based on having psychological problems.
This might include Social Security Disability income, veterans’ benefits, or
workers’ compensation and disability payments. The client is often reinforced
for maintaining symptoms. Successful therapy would very quickly lead to a review by the relevant agency and a loss of benefits. This is not true of every
client who receives such monetary benefits, as some are truly unable to function at a capacity that would resolve this dependence. Others, however, do have
greater potential for change, but the risks of such change appear to outweigh
the benefits.
Allen could be thought of as “retired.” He did not have to work, received
a check each month, had no expenses, could spend the day as he chose, and had
no responsibilities. If he were able to work, have friends, and support himself,
he would lose his retirement and have to follow the same course as most other
adults.
Rose, a 76-year-old woman, lived in a home that she and her late husband
bought 50 years earlier. It was now in need of major plumbing, electrical, and
mechanical repairs. She could not afford them based on her Social Security
check and public assistance. She could use the toilet in one bathroom but not
the sink. She could bathe and use the sink in another bathroom, but not the toilet. Because of the changing neighborhood, she was frightened to shop at the
nearby market. Her windows were nailed shut to prevent break-ins. When
asked why she continued to live there, she pointed out that she could sell the
house, but would then have to turn the money over to the city to reimburse the
city for the public assistance. That would leave her no money, and no home. Her
only recourse would be to live in a shelter.
Cultural Opposition to Help Seeking
The process of therapy, which involves trust, collaboration, self-disclosure,
and change, may be difficult for individuals from cultures where these behaviors are more aberrant than common. An understanding of the cultural
rules and schemas of a culture will help the therapist avoid these reasons for
impasse.
Impediments to Change 375
Questions about cultural rules of an individual or of a family can often be
addressed through supervision or consultation. Cultural issues that could impact the therapy might be related to the therapist’s gender, age, or ethnicity.
Certain religious groups demand that the client find a therapist of their
religious group inasmuch as therapists of other religious groups might not understand the client’s behaviors. In many cases, the cultural issue may be reflective of the client feeling uncomfortable with a therapist of a different cultural
group just as a therapist may be equally uncomfortable with a client of a different group.
Jena, aged 36, had converted from Christianity to Judaism to marry
Michael. Her husband then joined a Chasidic group and Jena found herself in
the midst of an ultra-Orthodox sect. In keeping with the cultural expectations,
Jena had 5 children in 7 years. After her third child was born, Jena started to
have severe headaches that, at first, were responsive to medication. Now, nothing seemed to help. They went to the rabbi, who after listening to her complaints, asked that all the mezuzahs (prayers on the doorpost of their home) be
brought to him. He read each one and found that the scribe who had written
them had made several errors. He predicted that once the errors were corrected, Jena’s headaches would vanish. After the corrections were made, Jena
had a brief period of relief, followed by a return of the headaches.
When she sought therapy from a Jewish therapist, the parameters of therapy were spelled out in a call from the rabbi for their group. He told the therapist what could and could not be discussed in therapy. Religion was not to be
discussed, her role within the community could not be discussed, her relationship with her husband should not be questioned, and the requirements of being
a Jewish wife could not be discussed. Rather than following his initial reaction
to refuse the case, the therapist asked for and received the client’s permission to
include the rabbi as a consultant to the therapy. The rabbi agreed to be available. Using the rabbi as a consultant, the therapist was, in fact, able to deal with
a number of relationship issues. Key among them was her husband’s demand
for more children. With the rabbi’s consultation, this demand was removed
inasmuch as having more children would cause damage to Jena, making her
less able to be the mother and Jewish wife that she was expected to be.
Maintenance of System Homeostasis
A systems model of family and group dynamics suggests that systems will work
(sometimes very hard) to maintain a balance or homeostasis. In its simplest
form, it involves keeping things as close to where they are as possible. Change
is seen as undesirable, and even dangerous, because the loss of homeostasis
brings about anxiety and the resultant discomfort. Through direct and indirect
maneuvering, families and other systems will seek to keep all members in the
same approximate position, even if that position is one of discomfort, pain, or
pathology. If, for example, the issue for a patient is being in a position of power,
any event or interaction that places the person in a position that seems less
than powerful will result in immediate action to restore the perception of
power.
What occurs in many interactions (especially true in family and couples
work) is that the participants know when the actions will reach the homeostatic
376 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
point. If any member crosses that line, the system will be unbalanced. To avoid
that, the members will withdraw from the interaction thereby using a homeostatic cutoff to keep things balanced.
Hillary, aged 40, was a single woman who lived with her physically disabled father. He was wheelchair-bound and spent the day in his room watching
television. Hillary would prepare his breakfast, prepare his lunch, and always
be home to prepare dinner. She would wash his clothes and clean the house. He
would greet her each night telling her about how tasteless the lunch had been.
He would often throw the food and dishes against the walls and then demand
that she clean up. He insulted her and called her “lazy and stupid” or called her
a “cow.” Her response to his insults was to apologize and tell him that she
would be more careful in the future. If he did not like what she prepared for
dinner, he would throw the plate against the wall and demand something else.
She had learned many years earlier that there was no time for dating in
her life because it interfered with her care of her father. When questioned
about her caring for her father, her response was that she had to do it because
if she didn’t no one else would. She sought therapy close to her 40th birthday.
She had decided that unless she did something else, she was going to die alone.
One of the therapeutic interventions was an attempt to extinguish her father’s abusive behavior. What Hillary agreed to try was to continue to make
him breakfast and lunch, but she would tell him that if he threw his dinner
against the wall she would not replace it and there would be no food again until
breakfast. That night he threw his dinner against the wall and screamed insults
at her. When she cleaned up the food and told him that there would be no food
until breakfast, he continued to scream insults at her. This continued for 2
more days. On the third day, he ate dinner without comment. He even asked for
seconds. Hillary needed support for what she knew she needed to be doing.
Over the course of the next few months, the same contingencies were used to
have him stop insulting her.
Gross Family Pathology
Related to the issue of homeostasis is frank family pathology. In this situation,
the level of emotional, cognitive, psychic, or behavioral functioning is diagnosed as disturbed. The pathology may take the form of global drug use, sexual
acting out, antisocial behavior, boundary violations, or abusive behavior (sexual, emotional, and physical) overt control and manipulation or all of the preceding. Individuals coming from chaotic, dysfunctional, and pathological
families can be said to come by their problems honestly.
It is no surprise when the therapist discovers during the client’s evaluation
that there is a significant family history of a particular symptom or disorder.
Disorders that are known to be heritable (e.g., bipolar illness, depression, or
schizophrenia) are often diagnosed by the presence of the family history. In
other cases, the family pathology results in a physically, mentally, or psychologically abusive environment that the therapist must report to social welfare or
legal offices.
Beyond the difficulties caused by the client’s own measure of this disturbance, the family circumstances are an impediment to progress when the chaos
or pathology of the family makes it difficult or impossible for the client to
Impediments to Change 377
change. The family pathology contributes to the smaller scale impediments to
change through missed appointments, problems in doing homework, difficulty
in maintaining gains, or the maintenance of a negative set concerning therapy.
Family problems may absorb an inordinate amount of therapeutic time, as the
client is constantly dealing with crises and demands from others in the system.
The only way that some clients can escape the influence of their family is
to physically leave the home or geographic area. For children, this is impossible, though the government may determine that it is in the best interests of a
child or adolescent to be placed in a foster care or institutional setting.
Alex was referred by his high school guidance counselor because of academic difficulty and failure, truancy, and fighting in school. When the psychologist called Alex’s mother and asked to meet with her, she claimed to be
unavailable. When the psychologist insisted, she became angry and started
cursing. When she was told that by not assuring that Alex went to school she
was in legal jeopardy, she agreed to come in. She came for the session and was
clearly intoxicated, whether on alcohol or some other substance. She informed
the psychologist that Alex’s father was incarcerated for assault with a deadly
weapon, and several other offenses. He was eligible for parole some 10 years
hence. It became clear that Alex came by his style honestly and was following
in his parent’s path.
Unrealistic Demands Compounded by Family Members
Clients can be confused or even paralyzed by their internal demands. These demands are complicated by hopelessness and inability to challenge this demanding internal dialogue. Such ruminations can cause clients to end up in a
downward spiral. When the external voices of family, friends, and significant
others are added to the mix, the client may be frozen in place or may even take
a contrary position and do whatever is opposed to the demands of others. The
therapist may be placed in the same role as these demanding others.
Claudia, aged 36, was the middle of five children, having an older brother
and sister and a younger brother and sister. Her siblings had all graduated from
prestigious universities and now held high-paying professional positions. All
were married and all had families. Claudia saw herself as the “failure,” “disappointment,” “black sheep,” and “disturbed one” of all of her siblings. She graduated from a community college and worked as a manager at a convenience
store. Her internal dialogue regarding her failure was amplified whenever her
parents would beg her to return to school and get a “real degree.” “Then,” they
said, “she could get a real job.” Being compared with her sisters who, her parents said, “are no smarter than you” was a constant source of distress.
Claudia viewed therapy as one more opportunity to fail. In fact, if she succeeded at therapy, it might mean that there would be both internal and external pressure to do even more.
Unrealistic Demands by Institutions
The major demands on clients from institutions and agencies come as a twoedged sword. One message is that change is desired, but the other message is
that change must occur within a limited time frame due to reimbursement
policies. Insurers and therapists voice the goal that there should be services
378 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
provided for those in need. At the same time, Clients know that if they do not
or cannot change within the limits of reimbursed services, they will be limited
in the therapy that they will receive.
Henry had an insurance plan that provided for 10 therapy sessions per
year. His long-term emotional difficulties needed a far more intensive approach. He reported that he barely got started in therapy when termination occurred. It was hard for Henry to use those 10 sessions very productively due to
his anxiety about losing access to treatment.
Financial Factors May Limit the Opportunities for Change
Financial factors can impede therapy in several ways. Related to the previously
noted point, once reimbursed services run out, therapy will end unless the patient has the financial resources to continue (or if the therapist can see the patient for a substantially reduced fee or for free). The financial issue can also be
a factor in abusive relationships; abused partners may be afraid of leaving because of inadequate financial resources to support themselves and their families. They may then choose to stay in an abusive situation against the best
interests of their personal safety or the safety of their family.
Marika was involved in a relationship with a man who would drink and
then become verbally and physically abusive. He was one of a series of abusive
relationship that Marika had over the years. To financially support her three
children, she stayed with her partner. Unlike previous partners, he provided a
home, food, utilities, and some companionship when not drinking. She resolved that it was better to be beaten than to lose whatever security she and her
children now had.
Lack of Resources or Support from the Environment
Clients may come to see the therapist as their principal support person. They
may experience few people in the world as accepting, understanding, caring,
and thoughtful as the therapist. They then place all of their eggs in the therapist’s basket. Therapy, however, is in many ways an unreal relationship, and it
has never been intended to replace a nonprofessional social network. One of
the goals of therapy with all patients is to help them build a broader, more useful, more accepting, more available, more generous, and more appropriate support network. Sometimes this can be done through recognized support groups
such as Alcoholics Anonymous, parenting groups, or disability-oriented groups,
or interest-based clubs such as a coin-collecting club or a bicycle riding club.
Rose, the elderly woman living alone in the crumbling home described
earlier, had one person she saw regularly, her therapist. Each week, she drove
the few miles to her provider’s office for their weekly chat. These meetings provided Rose with a purpose in getting out of her house and the sense of a safe
connection with someone in the outside world. There was little change in
Rose’s overall situation from week to week. Remaining stable and independent
was her primary therapeutic goal.
Resources with Conflicting Agendas for the Client
Many institutions give clients mixed messages. They state that they are willing
to support the individual because of the individual’s disability. This support
Impediments to Change 379
might include medical coverage, living expenses, and housing expenses. Support, however, is predicated on the individual having a diagnosable medical or
psychiatric disorder. The therapy provided under the institutional plans,
whether through the federal government or through some agency, requires
that the individual work to overcome the pathology. At that point, all financial
support would cease. It would be reasonable for an individual who is reinforced for having severe psychopathology to want to maintain their support.
Leonard, aged 56, was a client in a community mental health setting. He
had been receiving Social Security Supplemental Income (SSI) for at least 30
years. Though a college graduate, Leonard had a breakdown at age 24 and had
to leave his job and continue to live with his parents. He was diagnosed as having a schizoaffective disorder. He claims that he never had delusions or hallucinations, nor does he have them at this point. He was, and still is, he says,
extremely depressed. The diagnosis was adequate to get the government funding. The diagnosis has been used ever since despite the lack of his meeting criteria. When asked about this, Leonard smiles and replies, “When they ask me
about having hallucinations and delusions, I just smile and shake my head.
They always think that I am lying and that I am just not admitting to having
them. I have never lied.”
At this point in life, Leonard sees himself as retired. He sees no reason to
be in therapy. He takes antidepressant medication for the depression.
Problem or Pathology Factors
Cognitive Rigidity
The personality rigidity of some clients foils their ability to productively benefit
from therapy. With clients who are obsessive-compulsive, or paranoid, among
others, their symptoms preclude their acceptance of the therapist’s influence.
They may question the therapist’s motives or goals. They may be unable to
break out of the rigid position that they see themselves as having to maintain to
stay safe.
Significant Medical or Physiological Problems
It is essential for every client coming for therapy to have a complete medical
evaluation as part of a comprehensive assessment and treatment plan. It is unethical and dangerous for the therapist to be treating what may appear to be
psychological disorders that have a medical etiology. A client with hypothyroidism may appear depressed because of the slowed action and thinking. Conversely, hyperthyroidism might be confused with anxiety disorders.
Trust Impairments
Trust is a central issue in therapy. The trust must be bidirectional where the
client trusts the therapist and the therapist can trust the client. Clients with
problems of trust as a diagnostic part of the disorder will have problems in therapy. Traumatized clients may have recurring trust challenges, both internal and
external to therapy. Dangerous, threatening or antisocial clients can create unsafe conditions that make it impossible to continue therapy. Trust is a primary
goal, and until it begins to develop, little other progress is likely.
380 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Autonomy Press
Autonomous individuals will be reluctant to come for therapy. Their view is
that if they cannot help themselves, no one else can help them. The idea of
coming to someone’s office at a time set by someone else’s schedule, to talk
about personal matters, at best, is uncomfortable. Opening up to the possibility
of feedback and influence from others is even more difficult. Their avoidance of
therapy is seen as one way of maintaining their autonomy.
Impulsivity and Poor Executive Control
Clients who are impulsive, and this includes most children and adolescents, see
therapy as restrictive and limiting. At best, it is out of line with how they generally respond, at worst the therapy is seen as an onerous and problematic requirement that they cannot meet. Their standard and accustomed manner of
response is to act without thinking or self-monitoring rather than to selfmonitor and to think about actions.
Cognitive Limitations, Impairment, or Confusion
Clients who are confused because of schizophrenia, bipolar illness, or neurological injury or deficit will have difficulty making use of therapy. They may
have memory problems, difficulty in follow-through, difficulty with homework, and problems dealing with any abstractions. For some, verbal psychotherapy may be contraindicated, at least until their mental status improves
sufficiently enough to engage in some verbal exchange.
Clients may have limited cognitive ability as a result of limited intellectual
ability or neurological deficit. Their processing will be limited by the lowered
level of cognitive integration. Therapy goals will need to be adjusted according
to their capacity for learning and abstraction.
Social Isolation or Alienation
Relative social isolation can impede therapy by virtue of the reduced opportunities for the client. Autonomous clients may have difficulties with this, as they
are apt to tolerate and even seek jobs and situations where they can go about
their business relatively unfettered by the needs and demands of others. But
that also means that they will lack access to the support and stimulation of others. Other clients may be isolated due to some aspect of their family pathology
(known drug abusers), their personality style (e.g., introverted), or a low social
currency (e.g., physically unattractive).
Symptom Profusion
Anxious clients can overwhelm the therapist with graphic, elaborate, and detailed descriptions of their symptoms. Their idea is that if anything is left out,
they run the risk that the omitted piece will be the essential piece that makes it
impossible for them to be helped. If part of their symptom picture is gastrointestinal distress, they will regale the therapist with images of their distress. The
therapist will quickly learn more about the client’s gastrointestinal tract than is
necessary. These clients actually take a fairly dependent approach to therapy by
trying to spill all the details, expecting that the therapist will then organize all
Impediments to Change 381
the information and provide curative answers. In essence, clients avoid selfreflection by filling therapy time with excessively detailed symptomatic reports.
Extreme Dependence
Clients who are dependent often work to ensure that the therapist is totally and
completely on their side. They may overwhelm the therapist with data, bring
the therapist gifts, or praise the therapist for wit, insight, sensitivity, and perspicacity. The goal is closeness. Without the closeness, they believe that they will
be injured or even destroyed. They are often frightened by goal-oriented therapy in that it means that in a relatively short time they will be without their
helper.
Ongoing Self-Devaluation
Often termed low self-esteem or poor self-image, this involves devaluing
everything that one does or the concomitant overvaluing what everyone else
does (and therefore by comparison devaluing self). This often leads to “yesbut” behavior and to devaluing both the therapy and the therapist. This devaluation can be summed up by paraphrasing Groucho Marx’s comment, “I would
never join any club that would have me as a member.” The therapist and the
therapy are, by extension of working with the client, tainted.
Limited Energy for Change
Depression is a major contributor to this impediment. Individuals who are depressed will often have vegetative signs that include lowered energy. It then becomes difficult to cooperate in therapy because the major goal is to avoid any
activity that requires action or energy. The level of energy within the session,
for homework, or for interpersonal relationships is minimal. However, change
requires some energy. Thus, the pace of these clients’ change will be determined by the amount of energy that can be activated for working on change.
Substance Misuse
If substance-abusing clients come to sessions drunk or stoned, they cannot
make use of the therapy. What may occur is state-dependent learning whereby
they can only act in certain ways when under the influence of the substance.
Clients who are semiaware or semirelated to the therapist will make little use of
the therapy. When sober, they either will not remember what was said or done
or will have distorted it due to the filter of the drugs.
Summary
Despite carefully gathering data, organizing the obtained information, using a
structured and coherent approach to planning treatment and following a welldefined model of therapy, there are still potential impediments to effective, successful short-term therapy. Often, when treatment appears to stumble or falter,
the responsibility for the difficulties is laid at the doorstep of the client. Traditionally, difficulties in treatment were viewed as the result of client resistance,
382 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
either to the treatment or to change itself. Though convenient, such a view is
unfair, and often inaccurate.
The variables that can, and often do act to impede the progress of therapy
can be roughly divided into four categories; client factors, therapist factors, environmental factors, and problem or pathology factors.
Often, interactions of the variables in each of these categories can and will
limit the speed and the efficacy of treatment. These difficulties may lie in a lack
or absence of essential skills on the part of the client or the therapist, the lack of
motivation for change on the part of the client, the lack of structure in the
planning or goal setting of therapy, or unclear expectations on the part of both
the client and therapist. The symptoms or pathology that prompted treatment
in the first place present challenges to be specifically addressed as impediments
or barriers to treatment. These pathology factors should not just be attributed to
a client’s preference for pathology.
Bordin’s model of the working alliance emphasizes that the agreement as
to the goals and tasks of therapy, as well as the establishment of a positive, interpersonal bond between client and therapist are crucial to the success of
therapy. Many of the identified impediments to therapy appear to be related to
difficulties in the establishment of the working alliance. Lack of clarity in the
definition of problems and their related goals, lack of precision in the definition of the tasks of treatment, as well as confusion about the division of labor
in treatment and the failure to establish a collaborative, goal-directed relationship can severely limit the effectiveness of treatment. Other impediments are
related to the therapeutic bond. Lack of trust, interpersonal distance, therapeutic narcissism, overly technical or cold therapists, or extreme client dependence are disruptive forces that impede the emotional bond that is a
foundation of therapy.
Some impediments to treatment may not reside within the persons of the
therapist or client. Cultural, familial, social, and interpersonal factors can all
contribute to difficulties encountered in the treatment setting. In addition, factors related to the health and medical well-being of the client may contribute to
the degree of difficulty in a structured, planned intervention.
383
14
Chapter
Effective Termination
Termination refers to a point of ending in therapy. For one reason or another, contact between client and therapist is discontinued. Effectively
managed termination is a beneficial step in creating a lasting impression of
therapy as a positive experience. Likewise, if the process is poorly handled or
insufficiently negotiated, closure can diminish benefits. In more extreme
terms, a good termination can seal the success of therapy forever, but a bad termination can sour the best efforts.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Understand the rationale, foundation, and main components of an effective termination strategy.
• List six different types of termination.
• Explain the professional standards of care for competent termination.
• Define client abandonment.
• List 10 applied skills for effective termination.
There are two major viewpoints on psychotherapy termination. One view
is that termination is a logical conclusion that can be identified easily and intuitively when the pace of therapy slows or goals are reached. The other holds
that termination is a crucial stage in the therapy process that merits explicit and
careful attention. Both perspectives are relevant, but neither alone fully prepares therapists for the termination challenges of contemporary practice.
384 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Rationale for a Termination Strategy
Beliefs about when and why therapy should end are typically influenced by an
overall theoretical perspective on clinical psychopathology and the means and
ends of intervention. To some, therapy should conclude only after the patient’s
internal resources have been substantially strengthened by experiences accumulated during a long-term relationship with a therapist. To others, therapy
should conclude as soon as the patient experiences significant relief from targeted symptoms or problems. Both perspectives have empirical support, but we
are only just beginning to develop evidence-based ways to determine the
needed length of therapy. Practical contingencies often trump theoretical aspirations when it comes down to everyday decisions. At the same time, all therapist actions must fall within the bounds of ethical professional conduct. No
practical situation trumps this responsibility, but many circumstances require
difficult judgments.
Effectively navigating termination requires the clinician to blend clinical,
practical and ethical or professional considerations into a sound strategy. Here
are some hypothetical scenarios to illustrate why such a strategy is needed, and
what can happen when this vital ingredient is missing.
Practice Scenario 1: Trainee Limits
Anna was finishing a graduate practicum at the university student counseling
center. She felt highly attached to her clients and conflicted about terminating
therapy at the close of the semester. It made her sad to think that these relationships would “just end” and she would not know what happened in the lives of
her clients. As the time for termination drew closer, Anna avoided the topic.
She hoped to continue with some of her clients, although pragmatically this
was difficult and discouraged by the counseling center administration. New
class and research responsibilities would have to be compromised to make
time. The counseling center had defined office hours and very tightly allocated
office space, making schedules almost impossible, unless she broke the rules
and saw the clients after hours or at another location, without actual supervision. Anna began to ruminate about giving her favorite clients her home telephone number, and offering to correspond via e-mail or meet regularly for
coffee. That way, they could stay in touch.
Practice Scenario 2: Personal Changes and
Unprofessional Actions
Helen had been in intermittent treatment for depression for a dozen years at
the same clinic, with several therapist transfers. Each of these former transfers
had a reason that made sense to Helen. The most recent, however, occurred
without Helen’s realization. She had attempted to return after a hiatus of 6
months and found that her therapist was no longer working at that clinic. Further, she was informed that she could no longer be seen as a client in this practice due to changes in business policies, and no contact information was
available for her former therapist.


At her support group meeting, Helen softly sobbed, “What is wrong with
me that even my therapist didn’t want to see me anymore?” Someone in the
group told her that this therapist had relocated to a new office in a nearby
county, and had transferred many patients with him. Helen then tried to contact the therapist at his new location, and was informed by staff that his practice
was full and he was no longer accepting any new or transfer clients. The therapist did not return her call or make any attempt to contact her or assist with
transfer of her care or records.
Practice Scenario 3: Managed Care
After a few years in independent practice, Kelly began to worry that he was
burning out as a psychotherapist. He was vaguely depressed and demoralized,
although he continued to believe that he was doing good, ethical work and
helping his clients. He had been trained in both brief and long-term interventions. In ongoing practice, he found that it was difficult to terminate clients
after only brief interventions, and challenging to keep long-term treatments
oriented toward a goal. Many of his most difficult clients had treatment subsidized by managed care programs that approved only brief segments of therapy,
from 8 to 12 sessions per authorization. Monitoring and repeatedly obtaining
managed care approval was a recurring stress for him and his clients as it
seemed they had to talk about possible termination every time they turned
around.
Practice Scenario 4: Poor Boundaries
At her first session, Julie bluntly told her therapist, “I want to be sure that I
don’t get tangled up in therapy that goes on forever.” When the therapist inquired about Julie’s previous experience in therapy, she described a relatively
helpful, positive interaction. However, she felt somewhat guilty about having
“ducked-out” by simply failing to show for scheduled appointments and not returning the therapist’s calls and attempts to reschedule. “He was really nice and
supportive, but I was frustrated and did not know how to handle the situation.
We spent a lot of time talking about his life, and it got to the point where I
wasn’t sure which one of us was the therapist and which was the client. I didn’t
want to hurt his feelings, but I felt trapped, so I just stopped. This time, I want
to be sure the focus is on me.”
Practice Scenario 5: Unfocused Therapy
Andrew was somewhat confused about when it was appropriate for him to initiate termination. As a postdoctoral clinician, he had a foundation of basic experience, but he still had numerous questions about how and when to draw
therapy to an appropriate close. Many of his clients had resolved their initial
target problem but still had daily hassles and issues to discuss. Andrew continued to see them in therapy, but the work was unfocused. There were no established goals that could be measured, or objectives that would indicate the
completion of their work together. Much of the time he and the client seemed
386 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
to be just chitchatting. Andrew felt uncomfortable about bringing up the subject of termination because he was afraid it would cause uproar with some
clients, or that the client or his peers might construe this as client abandonment. So he kept scheduling sessions, avoided the subject, and decided that the
client would ultimately decide when enough was enough.
Practice Scenario 6: Harassment of Therapist
Joan had been working for more than a year with Leigh, an emotionally labile,
depressed young woman with aggressive and self-destructive tendencies. Leigh
demanded that Joan write a letter of “fitness for duty” so that she could return
to work after a mental health leave of absence. Leigh indicated that the letter
should attest to her emotional stability, ability to work effectively with people
who might be sick or otherwise vulnerable, and her ability to be honest and
trustworthy handling the personal belongings of others.
Joan did not think that she could reasonably make these statements based
on Leigh’s history and current functioning, so she declined to write the letter.
Leigh was outraged by this refusal and exploded with demands and threats,
saying she would stalk Joan until she wrote the letter, or enlist the help of her
gang-involved boyfriend if necessary. Joan was frightened and wondered
whether she should just write a generically supportive letter, or continue to refuse and maybe obtain a gun for self-protection. Instead, she decided to schedule more frequent sessions with Leigh to discuss the letter, but keep pepper
spray and a cell phone nearby at all times.
It may be helpful to pause at this point for discussion or reflection on how
you would describe the problems being encountered in the vignettes described
above. What are the different risks? Are there any potential ethical violations,
and if so, what are they? What do you think the therapist could or should do to
manage each situation?
These cases illustrate how therapy does not always conclude smoothly or
easily. And these are but a few of the risky and rocky situations that can develop when the therapist lacks a steady hand in directing therapy toward an appropriate conclusion under varying conditions. The client may appear to make
little if any progress. It may seem that the client will need therapy indefinitely.
Or it may be that circumstances abruptly precipitate termination. The client
and therapist might be uncertain of how much therapy is “enough.” Strong
emotions may make the ending particularly difficult. Conflicts and high emotions can significantly impact the judgment of either client or therapist, further
complicating an already challenging task. Failure to address termination directly can leave both client and therapist struggling with confusion and increase the vulnerability to adverse outcomes. Therapy can become unfocused,
unproductive, or even harmful if termination is not incorporated into the goals
of treatment.
Without a strategy to effectively manage termination, the therapist is ill
equipped to productively channel emotions or maintain a strong and reasoned
professional course of action. Termination is to a clinician what the landing of
an aircraft is to a pilot—a task that requires focused attention, skill, and planning, with an increased risk of adverse events or possible negative professional
Effective Termination 387
and legal consequences. Just as the pilot needs a flight plan, the clinician needs
a treatment plan. Just as the pilot needs to land the plane at the appropriate
time and location before running out of fuel, the clinician also needs to conclude therapy before running on fumes. Just as the pilot sometimes needs to
deal with storms, winds, and inclement conditions, the clinician needs to deal
with high emotions and other nonambient forces. Both want to achieve a safe
and uneventful landing.
Effective Termination Strategy
Effective termination strategy is based on a foundation of clinical, ethical, and
practical judgments. It is a “best practice” approach of creating positive closure
in the greatest number of cases. This maximizes the usefulness of therapy
overall, and minimizes possible stresses, especially the stress of a poor outcome
for the client and an adverse professional or legal action for the provider. The
judgments of a termination strategy are not separate or distinct, but blended
together in a plan for termination that is under development and revision
throughout therapy.
Main Components
The termination strategy has two main components: (1) ongoing communication and negotiation of the ending that is directly linked to the overall treatment plan, and (2) a reasonable plan of action that estimates when, why, and
how termination will take place. Ideally, effective termination begins before intake, as the provider determines on the basis of his or her skills and competence
those who will or will not be accepted for treatment. From there, termination
issues are addressed in the first few meetings in the context of informed consent to service and orientation to the tasks of treatment (J. Beck, 1995; B. E.
Bernstein & Hartsell, 2000; S. A. Kramer, 1986).
Any course of therapy, no matter how brief or lengthy, needs to have
a beginning, middle, and end, and a plan for what will take place during
each segment. As part of this fundamental structure, termination is acknowledged right from the beginning and a plan for termination is under consideration at all times. Creating a plan for termination can be considered a task of
treatment that is best approached through collaborative discussion. This
opens up a dialogue and establishes termination as part of the therapeutic
work and not simply an eventual destination or a unilateral decision of either
participant.
Types of Termination
According to Davis (2008), the quality of a termination can be characterized
by the quality of interaction between the participants concerning the ending
of their contract. The quality of interaction is determined by three elements:
(1) direct communication about reasons for termination; (2) opportunity to
388 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
express feelings, check perceptions, and assess satisfaction with the therapy
and therapist; and (3) a clear disposition decision concerning any ongoing or
potential future needs.
A better quality termination includes some direct communication about
the decision to terminate, some assessment and expression of affect, including
elements of satisfaction, dissatisfaction, or uncertainty, and a mutual understanding of a specified disposition, whether that disposition is final closure,
transfer, open-ended follow-up, or some other specified plan. In poor terminations, there is little or no direct communication about the reasons and timing of
termination, there may be no expressed affect or conversely an unproductive
profusion of affect, and finally there may be confusion or misunderstanding
about the disposition. The taxonomy of five types of termination is described by
Davis (2008): prospective, flexible, complex, oblique, and unprofessional termination. A sixth category—premature termination—is included here because
it is commonly discussed in the literature. These types of termination describe
a spectrum of possible experiences, from the positive closure we ideally hope to
capture to the conflicted or unprofessional termination that we aspire to minimize or avoid.
Premature Termination
Premature termination has been referred to as the ending of treatment without
the sense of psychological closure that comes with having resolved problems or
at least with an understanding of the reasons for ending therapy (Kleinke,
1994). In a research context, premature termination has been variously defined as failure to complete a predetermined number of sessions (Pekarik,
1992) or as attending only one to four sessions (Garfield, 1994). A problem
with the term premature is that these many different definitions have created a
category with multiple possible meanings. Prematurity is either judged from
the clinician’s perspective or is based simply on the client having chosen to attend only a few sessions.
Premature termination is considered a problematic waste of resources
and potentially demoralizing to both clinician and provider (Reis & Brown,
2006). However, clients who drop out before an expected number of sessions
are a heterogeneous group. The judgment of a termination as premature may
be due to a mismatch of expectations between therapist and client, where the
therapist is skeptical of quick fixes but the client prefers and expects brief
therapy (Reis & Brown, 2006). To avoid the implications of a therapist bias toward long-term treatment, we prefer not to label any termination as premature. Instead, a more specific term can be selected from the other types of
termination, based on the quality of the interaction rather than the assumptions of the therapist. A more qualitative description of termination allows us
to better understand the interaction between provider and client and to recognize the client’s stage of change as relevant to the length of therapy (see
Chapter 12 on understanding change).
Prospective Termination
Prospective termination is the expected model for termination. Most often, the
client’s goals have been reached and provider and client agree that it is reason-
Effective Termination 389
able to draw therapy to a close. Sometimes prospective termination occurs
without the client’s goals being fully achieved, but termination is planned for
some other reason such as a specific time limit. Prospective termination always
includes some advance notice, even if that is only a few sessions or possibly just
one. There is a shared decision-making process where various considerations
are directly discussed by the provider and the client. Often there is some progression into the process of termination, such as spacing out sessions at greater
time intervals until a final session is planned.
The decision to end therapy ideally includes agreement between
provider and client, but total agreement is not necessary. Either party has
veto power over the therapy relationship. The client has absolute veto power
and can end therapy at any time for any reason. The clinician must operate
within the bounds of professional duty and cannot end therapy without cause
but can and sometimes must end therapy with cause, ethically and positively.
The provider’s actions are still positive and constructive because there is an
identified reason, a clear disposition, and a process of direct communication
with the client.
In prospective terminations, it sometimes happens that neither provider
nor client is actually happy about ending, but they have identified, discussed,
and understand the reasons for the action. There has been an opportunity for
the client to express feelings and ask questions to resolve doubts or check perceptions. The therapist has made an effort to assess the client’s satisfaction with
both therapy and the therapist. Overall, the process of interaction and psychological integration is positive, even if there is a range of conflicted emotions.
There is no specific expectation of permanent resolution of problems as a prerequisite for termination. Circumstances may bring about unexpected or forced
termination, and the provider must handle it in an appropriate and skillful professional manner. A caring, dignified, and respectful approach to creating a
transition out of therapy can engender positive closure even under less than
ideal circumstances.
In terms of disposition, both client and provider know that therapy has
ended. They are clear on how any ongoing or future client needs might be
handled. Disposition often includes an option to follow up “as needed.” Clients
vary in their potential need for follow-up, depending on the nature and severity of their original problems and their access to treatment. In some situations,
follow-up may not be likely or feasible because of personal changes, as people
move and redirect their lives. When the provider is certain that he or she will
not be available for follow-up beyond a certain point (e.g., moving in 6
months), then some discussion of follow-up alternatives is needed. If termination is forced by the limits of insurance, managed care, or other financial factors and the client is otherwise unready for termination, referrals and efforts to
link the client to other resources are vital to a positive process. These are often
the most difficult dispositions and are where the clinician is most apt to extend
efforts to allow time for formal departure discussion and planning.
Flexible Termination
Flexible termination occurs when the client has improved but postpones
further sessions or does not follow up in rescheduling. Regular meetings are
390 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
discontinued, but the formal process of closure is abbreviated and the option
to return is open and left to the client’s discretion. Usually the client has made
some gains and the termination is generally positive and appropriate. The opportunity for follow-up is made clearly available, and it is assumed that the
client will take advantage of this option if and when it may be needed.
Flexible termination may be appropriate and useful when the client has
insufficient energy for active change but also does not want to definitively
withdraw from the process either. There has been some improvement and the
client is either saying, “That’s enough for now. I’ll be back later for more,” or
“This might be enough but I’m not sure.” Circumstances often combine with
initial improvements, tipping the client toward greater willingness to stop and
resume when issues might be more pressing or change is more readily possible.
The emotional tone of a flexible termination is usually positive, and the established relationship remains as a viable resource for the client, although the ongoing contract for sessions is discontinued.
Based on previous experience with Lucy (case example), the therapist interpreted the message to mean that Lucy was in less distress and wanted to terminate contact for some undetermined and perhaps indefinite length of time,
Case Example—Prospective Termination
Luke had worked with his therapist off
and on for over 3 years when his employer abruptly changed insurance
plans. His therapist was not in the preferred provider network of his new
plan. Luke was going through some significant family stress, and he had been
dissatisfied with several previous therapists so he was not enthusiastic about a
transfer. The provider checked with the
insurance plan and they approved payment for three sessions to allow time
for closure and transition to a new therapist, if the client wished to continue
therapy. There was no provision for
payment beyond that point because
there were plenty of other in-network
providers in the geographic area.
Luke presented no imminent danger
of harm to himself or anyone else. The
three sessions were used to discuss
Luke’s current status and situation, his
overall progress and the skills he had
acquired, the financial implications of
continuing with his current provider
versus transferring to a new therapist,
his options of continuing treatment
or terminating with an option to begin
with a new therapist, and his feelings
about the current situation and the
therapy process. Luke had an opportunity to ask questions, express his
feelings, assess his strengths and accomplishments, get the therapist’s help
in weighing the options and making a
decision, and be reassured of the therapist’s support in providing records or
information to new providers should
Luke request that in the future. Luke
expressed satisfaction with his progress
and with the provider’s efforts to offer
formal termination discussion. Together they reviewed the list of alternative providers, and the therapist helped
Luke identify three likely candidates.
Luke decided that he would use this list
for his plan to follow up on an “as
needed” basis.
Effective Termination 391
knowing she had the option of returning. In supporting Lucy’s autonomy and
self-directed use of resources, the therapist accepted this as a flexible termination
and did not insist that Lucy complete a formal termination. The therapist left a
follow-up message for Lucy stating, “I got your message. That’s fine. I assume
that you will let me know if or when you want to reschedule or resume sessions.
If you want to come in to talk about this plan, don’t hesitate to call me.”
Complex Termination
Complex termination happens when communications about termination do not
follow an ordinary course. Most clients can discuss termination and come to a
reasonable resolution. However, some clients have extreme emotional reactions, or they may not be able to discuss termination in a reasonable way at all.
Complex terminations are difficult and stressful for client and provider, and
resolution is not readily established. These terminations require additional attention and care, as the risk for an adverse outcome is elevated.
Complex terminations can be triggered by several factors that interact and
produce a bottleneck in communication. These factors include the client’s interpersonal response biases, the provider’s vulnerabilities, length of therapy,
the client’s progress, and the precipitating reasons for termination. The client’s
idiosyncratic cognitive profile and coping strategies are often the most significant factors in this equation, along with situations that produce significant secondary gain or advantages associated with the client’s illness.
Clients with personality disorders or significant Axis II psychopathology
are most likely to have a complex termination. These clients have a tendency to
prolong or otherwise distort termination, and the clinician must create and
maintain reasonable boundaries. Clients who are emotionally overwrought by
termination need special assistance in coming to terms with these limits and in
managing their emotional reactions. Gradually fading sessions or building toward termination help to mediate a highly reactive client’s perceptions of termination as being too abrupt. Clients also sometimes terminate in abrupt,
precipitous ways. Clinicians usually attempt to prevent abrupt departures by
involving the client in a plan for termination early in therapy, and encouraging
the client to discuss any impulses toward suddenly quitting therapy.
Case Example—Flexible Termination
Lucy was in therapy off and on for various health anxiety issues. Over time,
she had made notable gains. Recently,
she returned for help with a bout of obsessive thinking triggered by some unusual sensations in her chest. Over the
course of six sessions, Lucy quickly activated her skills in managing thoughts
about potential health problems, and
she identified other contributing tensions, including work stress and family
conflict. Although the various stresses
continued, Lucy was coping better and
worrying less. When a schedule conflict
caused her to cancel an appointment,
she left a message stating, “I’d like to
cancel for now and get back with you
after things settle down.”
392 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Consultation helps support the provider through what may be a difficult,
even arduous process of making judgments and taking actions under stressful
conditions, especially when there is overt conflict or the client becomes angry
or accuses the therapist of wrongdoing. This high-risk situation recalls our
metaphor of attempting to land an aircraft, but the original flight plan has been
rendered impossible by thunderstorms or gale force winds. Redirection is necessary to protect the safety of all involved.
Case Example—Complex Termination
Gail was extremely emotionally reactive
and prone to misinterpret the actions of
her therapist. She often worried that she
was “a pain” to the therapist and expected to be dumped or fired as a client.
This was a significant pattern in Gail’s
life, as she was highly sensitive to potential rejection in both close and casual
personal relationships. One of her primary coping strategies was to avoid humiliation or distress by impulsively
rejecting people at the slightest sign of
uncertainty. Gail’s mood was depressed
and her functional impairment varied
from moderate to severe. She was
hardly ready for termination.
Gail was making progress and had
recently achieved the goal of visiting
her children during the holidays. She
then interpreted her therapist’s attentive listening to the description of her
achievement as an indication that she
should terminate therapy. As they were
wrapping up the session, Gail abruptly
said, “Well, I guess this means we’re
done.” With that, she quickly left the
office without scheduling her next appointment. When the therapist phoned
her about rescheduling, Gail acted surprised. “I thought when you were quiet
for so long, that meant you were tired
of listening to me. Now that I was able
to see my kids, therapy must be over.”
Gail’s therapist explained that termination should not occur in such an abrupt
way, and asked Gail to work with her
on developing a clear plan and set of
goals for termination.
Oblique Termination
Oblique termination refers to a termination that is unilaterally enacted by the
client without discussion, explanation, or response to follow-up contacts. The
contextual cues offer little explanation and the therapist may be quite surprised by the client’s disappearance. This termination is abrupt, although it may
be preceded by lateness and cancellations. The “no-show” or “no call” and no
further communication create an unsettled dimension. The communication is
incomplete, and there is no message of client satisfaction or interest in following up at a future point. The behavior of the client is precipitous and evasive so
the therapist cannot adequately glean the subtle or contextual cues for the
client’s reasoning. The emotional undertone suggests a negative component,
but this is unconfirmed. This type of termination can occur at any point in therapy, but most often occurs after relatively few sessions. Possible reasons for an
oblique termination may be a provider-client mismatch, client dissatisfaction
with the provider or the process, ineffective or harmful therapy, some unique
Effective Termination 393
adverse reaction to therapy, poor communication skills among otherwise satisfied clients, or disruptive events in the client’s life that are unknown to the
therapist.
Case Example—Oblique Termination
Just as he got to his car after leaving his
third therapy session, Rick received a
text message from a family member
alerting him to a family crisis. His father, who lived 400 miles away, had
suffered a stroke. In the flurry of dealing with this crisis, he forgot all about
his next therapy visit. The therapist,
who knew nothing of the father’s illness, left a voice message following
Rick’s “no-show,” but never received a
reply. Unbeknownst to the therapist,
Rick decided he was just too preoccupied with dealing with his father’s situation to be in therapy, but might return
if needed at some point. He viewed
follow-up communications as rather
annoying, trivial, and unnecessary and
he was unsure what he wanted to say.
So he did not respond to the therapist’s
two phone messages. He figured, “I’ll
call him if I need him. That’s what he’s
there for.”
Unprofessional Termination
Unprofessional termination occurs when the provider fails to uphold reasonable
standards of conduct expected of a mental health provider. To label a professional’s actions as unprofessional is a serious charge, potentially career altering
or ending, and should not be done without a full understanding of all the information and relevant context. With this caveat in mind, we speak only of potential indications of unprofessional termination. Any final determination of
unprofessional conduct must be done with all the facts pertinent to a particular
case. Talking about clinical dilemmas among colleagues and peers is helpful,
but care should be taken to do this in a professional manner.
Unprofessional termination involves actions that are exploitive or capricious and damaging or potentially damaging to the client. The duties of professional conduct require that the provider has a rationale for termination that
falls within the scope of reasonable professional actions. The provider’s personal limitations, difficulties, or commitments may be a reason for termination
insofar as these circumstances impact the provider’s competence and ability to
provide safe and effective therapy. It is not unprofessional for the provider to
have human needs and limits. It is unprofessional for the provider to terminate
therapy to pursue personal gain directly from the client. It is unprofessional to
impulsively or abruptly terminate therapy because of being frustrated or angry
with the client. Further, it is unprofessional not to follow through in assisting
the client with understanding the termination, considering alternative resources, and having access to his or her record of care.
394 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Competence and Professional Standards of Care
What skills must the provider have to develop and use effective termination
strategies? Ask yourself what you think a clinician needs to know to effectively
navigate the procedures of ending therapy. You’ve worked hard to build your
skills for assessment, conceptualization, alliance, and intervention. What more
does it take to be competent in handling termination? Can you identify any
particular subskills for this important task?
A provider’s competence in handling the many challenges of termination
begins with an adequate foundation of ethical reasoning and familiarity with
professional standards of care (Davis, 2008). Contrary to the common belief
that providers should initiate termination only under the rarest circumstances,
current standards of care support and even demand termination in a surprisingly broad range of situations. Whereas termination based on reasonable professional judgment and procedure is an ethically sound and appropriate action
(Fisher, 2003), both clinical acumen and sound ethical and legal judgment are
needed to navigate the conditions of today’s clinical practice. To develop this
sound judgment, therapists need to have a clear grasp of the relevant expectations as delineated by ethical codes and guidelines.
Although each mental health discipline of psychology, social work, counseling, and so forth has its own official ethics code, the underlying principles
are essentially the same fundamental principles of beneficence and nonmaleficence, responsibility, integrity, justice and respect for individual autonomy
(American Psychological Association [APA], 2002; Beauchamp & Childress,
2001). The principle of respect establishes that the practitioner must appreciate
the client’s right to autonomy and self-determination. The practitioner makes
recommendations, but it is the client’s right to choose whether to accept the
recommendations or the therapy. Clients have the right to terminate therapy at
Case Example—Unprofessional Termination
Jennifer’s client Martina was starting a
new custom jewelry business and
wanted a partner. Not wanting to miss
this ground-floor opportunity, Jennifer
decided that the best thing would be to
terminate therapy with Martina so that
she could become her business partner.
Both thought this was terrific, since
“we already work so well together.”
The business failed, and both lost
money. Martina became depressed and
wanted to resume her therapy. Jennifer
refused, saying that she was sick and
tired of dealing with Martina’s lazy, ineffective behavior. When Martina requested her records to take to another
therapist, Jennifer said she would send
them but never did. Martina was upset
and angry over having lost her business, her investment, and her relationship with Jennifer so she filed a
complaint of unprofessional conduct
with the state licensing board.
Effective Termination 395
any point without notice. Unless it can reasonably be determined that the client
poses imminent risk of physical harm to self or others, the practitioner need
only take reasonable action to confirm the client’s intentions. If the client does
pose specific risks, the provider must take whatever actions are indicated under
state laws to protect against harm, such as contacting a significant other or involving mental health crisis outreach.
Beneficence and nonmaleficence are principles that refer to the practitioner’s
striving to provide benefit and avoid harm in working with clients. This is interpreted to mean that the practitioner only provides services that are actually beneficial to the client. If a therapist likes an intervention and believes it to be
helpful, that’s great. But the therapist has to remain somewhat of a skeptic, because if the client does not actually benefit, then continuing the intervention is
unethical. This point can be easily lost in dealing with painful issues when the
client is distressed and the benefits are not exactly clear. Nevertheless, it is still
up to the provider to ensure that the therapy is actually providing benefit. Similarly, if the client appears to be harmed by the therapy, it should be stopped.
Client perceptions of the benefit or harm of therapy should be checked regularly
and any perception of harm taken very seriously. These judgments of benefit
and harm are often difficult to make and are explored in greater detail later.
The contractual and professional nature of psychotherapy as a service distinguishes this relationship from other personal attachments. The provider is
both ethically and legally bound to adhere to the principles of responsibility, integrity, and justice in professional relationships, even though the provider is
still free to take the personal risk of being irresponsible, or discriminatory in
other nonprofessional matters. To competently handle termination matters, the
provider must be reliable, honest, and fair.
Every state has specific statutes (laws) as well as rules and regulations that
define the legal parameters of health-related practice, with the intended purpose of protecting the best interests of the public. As licensed professionals,
mental health providers are expected to adhere to professional standards of conduct as a function of the state laws that grant the license to practice. It is common for a specific professional ethics code to be adopted within the practice
rules and regulations of that discipline to establish a legally enforceable set of
expectations for professional conduct. Thus, the professional ethics code is more
than just a good idea or a suggested guideline. When it is incorporated into the
rules of practice, it takes on the force of law, and it defines expected standards of
practice within the professional role.
Across the different mental health disciplines of psychology, psychiatry,
social work, advanced practice nursing, pastoral counseling, counseling, and
marriage and family therapy, there is much similarity in the ethical codes for
professional conduct and the provision of therapeutic services. The actual texts
of the different ethics codes are a great resource for understanding basic professional role expectations in both routine and challenging circumstances (see
American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy [AAMFT], 2001;
American Association of Pastoral Counselors [AAPC], 1994; American Counseling Association [ACA], 2005; APA, 2002; National Association of Social
Workers [NASW], 1999). Together, they illustrate a common standard of care
within the professional practice of mental health care.
396 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Ethical Responsibilities Specific to Termination
If therapy is interrupted, providers are expected to make reasonable efforts to
facilitate access to alternative service (AAMFT, 2001, 1.11; AAPC, 1994, III.A;
ACA, 2005, A.11.a; APA, 2002, 3.12). Interruptions might be either anticipated
or unanticipated. Providers are also expected to make reasonable efforts to provide orderly and appropriate resolution of responsibility for client care in the
event that their employment or contract ends, with paramount consideration
given to client welfare (APA, 10.09). Dealing with interruptions usually means
offering the client information for locating other providers or types of service,
or providing a reference back to their managed care contractor for information
on their provider network. It does not mean one must schedule an appointment and go with the client to be sure the contact is made and that the client
likes the new provider.
In some cases, a conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest might
require termination with proper referral. A conflict of interest is any situation
that might “interfere with the exercise of professional discretion or impartial
judgment” (NASW, 1999, 1.06 (a)), or “(1) impair their objectivity, competence, or effectiveness in performing their functions,” or “(2) expose the person
or organization with whom the professional relationship exists to harm or exploitation” (APA, 2002, 3.06).
Providers are generally expected to “terminate therapy when it becomes
reasonably clear that the client/patient no longer needs the service, is not likely
to benefit, or is being harmed by continued service” (APA, 2002, 10.10 (a)). If
the provider cannot provide professional help and offers clinically appropriate
referrals that are subsequently refused, the provider is directed to discontinue
the relationship (ACA, 2005, A.11.b).
Providers are prohibited from terminating therapy for the pursuit of sexual intimacies with clients, relatives, or significant others of current therapy
clients (APA, 2002, 10.05; 10.06). Termination for the purpose of pursuing
other social or financial relationships with the client may be expressly restricted (NASW, 1999, 1.16 (d)), or restricted by the calculated risk of impairing the provider’s objectivity, competence, or effectiveness, or of exploiting or
harming the client (APA, 2002, 3.05).
In preventing exploitation or harm, providers also have a right to selfprotection. Nonpayment of agreed-on fees for services can be an acceptable
reason for termination (ACA, 2005, A.11.c). However, it is wise to ensure that
the financial arrangements have been made clear to the client, that the clinical
and other consequences of nonpayment have been discussed, and that the
client does not pose an imminent danger to self or others (NASW, 1999, 1.16
(c)). If the client threatens or otherwise endangers the provider or creates jeopardy of harm, or another person with whom the client has a relationship creates these conditions for the provider, termination is permitted (ACA, 2005,
A.11.c; APA, 2002, 10.10 (b)).
To complete termination in an ethical and professional manner, clinicians
provide notice and offer termination counseling prior to ending contact, suggest alternative service providers as appropriate (APA, 2002, 10.10 (c)), and
discuss the benefits and risks of options for the continuation of service (NASW,
Effective Termination 397
1999, 1.16 (f)). The exception to this provision would be preclusion by actions
of the client or third-party payers (APA, 2002, 10.10 (c)). The intent as we
understand it is to provide communication that fosters the client’s informed
self-determination, if that is not deterred by the client’s own threatening or
noncooperative behavior. Providers are not ethically required to provide termination sessions that are not approved by the third-party payer (insurance or
managed care). Many providers, however, do offer at least a single termination
session even if it is not reimbursed, as a good risk management strategy. Investing a bit of uncompensated time to support the client’s resolution is usually
well worth the effort.
When termination or interruption of services can be anticipated, it is appropriate to notify clients promptly and seek resolution in accordance with the
clients’ needs and preferences (NASW, 1999, 1.16 (e)). Pretermination counseling
should include: (a) advance notice of termination when possible; (b) discussion of
the reasons for termination; (c) an opportunity for clients to ask questions about
termination; and (d) referral information as appropriate (Fisher, 2003).
Client Abandonment
Many providers are confused about when or how they can appropriately initiate termination. Traditionally, mental health clinicians have taken an extremely conservative position based on the assumption that completion of
treatment meant a long-term course of therapy that could only end when the
client felt ready to depart. If a therapist ended therapy, it was considered abandonment, an egregious professional error. Thus it may not be unusual to encounter colleagues with circumscribed views on ethically appropriate reasons
for termination. “Once a patient, always a patient,” is the admonition, implying
that once a client is accepted, therapy becomes a noncancelable contract.
This adage of always a client has been mistakenly interpreted to mean
that the practitioner is perpetually responsible for the client and cannot ethically end treatment. The client is cast in the role of decision maker to the extent
that therapy cannot end if the client vetoes the action. Further, client resistance
to termination has been taken to mean that therapy must continue or the
provider will be guilty of abandonment. Together, the threat of abandonment
and the demands of the “in perpetuity” principle create a bottleneck for reasonable determination of when it is appropriate for the provider to initiate, recommend, or even insist on termination.
Many conscientious and compassionate providers unnecessarily fear making an inadvertent blunder due to a blurry concept of abandonment. The professional ethics codes offer no direct guidance on this issue because they do not
discuss abandonment. The laws governing clinical practice offer little additional
insight either, as one does not find any specific statute that spells out parameters of abandonment.
Abandonment is a legal concept that has been applied mainly in medical
malpractice cases where direct harm occurs from the physician’s failure to
complete necessary treatment such as chemotherapy. When this concept is
extrapolated to psychotherapy, completion of treatment has been equated
with the client’s readiness to quit. But the completion of psychotherapy is not
398 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
readily definable and is highly related to the goals and productivity of the
therapy, concepts that are also difficult to precisely establish (Weiner, 1998).
In its literal meaning, abandonment refers to deserting or forsaking a duty.
A practical definition in the context of psychotherapy is the absence of a clinically and ethically appropriate process of termination of the professional relationship (Younggren & Gottlieb, in press). What is a clinically and ethically
appropriate process of termination? It is one that meets the professional standards of care and fulfills the duties expected of a mental health professional.
To meet professional standards, the provider is expected to exercise a level
of care and judgment that is comparable to an average provider within the
same discipline. A dereliction of the duty occurs when there is willful neglect or
action that falls below general community standards for reasonable or prudent
action. Practice statutes require conduct that is moral, professional, and honorable as defined by community standards of care. Abandonment can occur if the
provider fails to fulfill the identified duties at the level of community standards
and causes direct harm to the client as a result. Providers owe a duty to their
clients primarily in three areas: (a) to protect against known, imminent physical harm; (b) to create and maintain a professional record of services; and (c) to
conduct practice in a professional manner. Thus, a standard-of-care model defines an appropriate termination as one that addresses these three duties.
Termination and Protection from Harm
Practitioners are generally expected to assess for the imminent risk of physical
harm, and to take steps to protect any identifiable potential victim, including
the client (Fulero, 1988; Sales, Miller, & Hall, 2005). Terminating therapy without assessing for any imminent risk of harm to self or others can be abandonment if there is subsequent harm. If a client has a history of self-harm,
previous suicide attempts, or violence toward others, the average provider
would be expected to recognize the need for assessing this risk before discharging the client. Because emotional crisis can increase a client’s potential for impulsive and potentially violent actions, it is generally unwise to terminate
anyone at the peak of a crisis. The exception to this would be if the client is directly threatening to harm the practitioner (APA, 2002, 10.10 (b)). Termination
may appropriately occur at some point before a crisis is completely resolved,
but imminent risk of harm has subsided or further steps to reduce the risk of
harm have been taken (e.g., hospitalization).
Termination and Record Keeping
The construction, maintenance, and disposal of client records is regulated by
state and federal laws (e.g., Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act; HIPAA) that are designed to protect privacy and preserve the client’s
timely and effective access to this personal information. Failure to provide appropriate access to the client’s record can be construed as potentially harmful
to the client. Practitioners can avoid most if not all risks of abandonment of
client records by following record-keeping guidelines. This duty does not have a
direct relationship to decisions of termination, but it does apply to professional
actions posttermination. Client records must be maintained in a secure and accessible location for an extended period after therapy ends. State laws usually
Effective Termination 399
define the minimum length of time that secure records must be kept. The
essence of the duty is to make reasonable efforts to provide client access to
records and not to simply abandon the record in an unsecured, inaccessible, or
unknown location.
Termination and Professional Conduct
The third duty pertains to behaving in a manner that engenders public trust.
General standards for professional conduct require the provider to behave in an
orderly, predictable, ethical, and fair manner when offering services. If the
client is directly harmed by the clinician’s failure to provide agreed-on services,
this can be construed as abandonment. Providers are expected to do what they
said they would do and provide clients with a means of communication
throughout treatment. This includes establishing when and how to reach the
provider, what to do in case of an emergency, and what alternative resources
might be used if the provider is unavailable. This is not an obligation to be
available “on demand” to respond to the client’s whims and impulses, or to
continue therapy with an unresponsive, uncooperative, or hostile client.
A provider who cannot complete treatment, for whatever reason, has a
duty to assist the client in locating other resources. If further treatment is not
necessary, steps can be taken to draw the work to a close. Termination is in fact
an appropriate fulfillment of one’s professional duties when there is a conflict
of interest, the client no longer needs therapy, is unlikely to benefit, or the
provider cannot offer services of a sufficient quality to be beneficial to the
client. The client does not have to agree or even like the termination, although
it is certainly preferable to seek reconciliation of opinion. The practitioner is
not obliged to continue services until the client feels ready to accept the termination or until an unresponsive client improves. In fact, there may be a greater
risk of harm to the client by continuing unproductive or ineffective therapy.
Continuation of therapy is contraindicated when there is no benefit or there is
potential harm to either client or provider.
If termination occurs because the practitioner has been fired, downsized,
or laid off from work, the practitioner is not obliged to continue working without pay to avoid accusation of client abandonment. What providers must do,
however, is take reasonable steps to manage termination in a professional way
that protects the client’s best interests as well as addresses their own personal
and professional risks.
Applied Skills for a Sound Strategy
As noted, an effective termination strategy has two main components; an ongoing dialogue and a plan of action. Effective implementation of this strategy
requires certain applied skills. The clinician not only must know what is required for appropriate termination, but must also know how to do it consistently with skill and expertise. Successful, positive termination is not random,
but rather a function of systematically using the following applied skills
(Davis, 2008).
400 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
Talking about Termination
Practitioners need sufficient technical skill and cognitive effort to be effective
in the role of therapist. They also need strong professional communication
skills to ensure that therapy begins and ends on a positive note. Communications about termination should ideally occur at multiple points throughout the
process of professional consultation, from intake and orientation to treatment
planning, progress assessment, and finally to deciding on a point of closure. To
be ready to talk about termination with confidence and authority, the clinician
also should undertake much preparation before the client ever arrives. This includes defining the limits of practice, setting a basic policy on termination, and
having a general plan to deal with limits, disruptions, or unexpected events.
The most important aspect of communicating about termination is to
make certain that it happens. Avoidance of the subject should not be the default
approach. Beginnings and endings are important, much as the takeoff and
landing of an aircraft are times of particular attention to fundamental tasks.
The topography of communication about termination (e.g., the frequency,
length, detail) will vary according to the client’s particular involvement in therapy. In uncomplicated situations, discussion about termination may be minimal
but strategically placed. In more complex clinical situations, the communications about termination may be more frequent, or may require more thought,
consultation, and attention to detail in progress notes.
For some clients and therapists, termination may be more difficult to talk
about than sex or money. This underassertiveness can have many components,
including the avoidance of uncomfortable feelings, awkwardness with the subject, lack of clarity on reasons for termination, or a fear of abandonment. Finding the right time to broach the subject and knowing what to say and how to say
it are all skills we expect the therapist to develop.
At the heart of difficulty with termination communications may be distorted beliefs about strong emotions. Both client and therapist may fear that
talk of termination will produce hurt feelings that cause the other to feel rejected. Either may fear the other will become angry or critical, especially if the
termination issues include elements of disappointment or lack of progress. Or it
may be that worry about emotional reactions is not a distortion. Talk of termination really will precipitate a firestorm of client affect, so the therapist avoids
the subject. Recognizing this tension is the first step in its remediation, followed by efforts to bring the topic into the discussion. Further information on
thoughts and beliefs that impede termination communications, as well as specific conversational targets, can be found in Davis (2008).
These communications seal the success of therapy. The provider always
hopes to create a sense of psychological order and productivity at termination,
regardless of the reason. The client’s autonomy, right to self-determination, and
responsibility to make personal decisions are always respected and encouraged.
Discussion of the client’s accomplishments, as well as strengths and opportunities
ahead, can reinforce a sense of dignity and value associated with participating in
therapy, even if the contact is quite brief. Doing this in a warm, respectful, and
encouraging way can also create a more positive experience with the provider
and with psychotherapy.
Effective Termination 401
Therapists who are having trouble with personal reactions to termination
should check their internal agenda. Some examples of troublesome personal
reactions include being overly directive, disrespecting the client’s autonomy,
feeling out of control or highly uncomfortable, personalizing the client’s desire
to end therapy, or feeling unable to let go. Clients might express fears of having
a relapse, doubt their ability to solve problems without the input of the therapist, fear disappointing the therapist, or are unhappy with the circumstances
surrounding the termination. These reactions can be examined within open
and supportive discussion as part of considering the decision to end or continue
therapy.
Develop a Practice Profile and Informed Consent Policy
on Termination
A practice profile spells out the provider’s approach to psychotherapy in terms
of competencies, philosophy of practice, and pragmatic aspects of service. Having clarity in this profile aids in concrete tasks such as creating marketing and
informed consent materials. Although it is not absolutely necessary, it is useful
to develop a written profile that specifies the types of service and populations
served, the major methods used, and the structure of the practice. Having a
written statement creates a framework of consistency for ongoing decisions
about the boundaries of one’s clinical practice. If these boundaries are clear and
specific rather than vague or ambiguous, the provider can better manage both
professional risk and personal stress. The written practice policy also ensures
having an adequate informed consent agreement with each client. Providers
who are working in a setting where the practice policy and informed consent
forms have already been developed and written by someone else will still want
to articulate their own statement of personal competencies, philosophy, and
pragmatic limits. Providers will also want to review their practice profile from
time to time to evaluate the need for updating or correcting any information.
Informed consent discussions usually begin at intake. Brief but explicit
discussion of termination at this stage can greatly enhance smooth consideration of this issue throughout therapy. Details of the provider’s policy on termination need to be clarified and preferably written into the statement of
informed consent for psychotherapy, including what to expect in terms of who
initiates termination as well as when and how termination might occur. Specific mention of billing or scheduling issues as triggers for termination may be
explained here, even if these points are repeated in other parts of the informed
consent document. Details of these policies may vary according to the provider,
agency, or practice setting. The following is an example of a termination policy
that is similar to those outlined by Davis (2008).
Example: Termination Policy
Termination of services typically occurs by mutual agreement when treatment
goals have been met, or when maximum benefit has been reached. However, you
have the right to terminate at any point. If possible, it is best to discuss therapy
termination prior to ending contact. Please feel free to raise the issue at any point,
402 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
especially if you have concerns about the benefit of your therapy or are wondering
if or when it should end. If I think you might be better served by other resources,
including a more intensive level of care, I may initiate termination. I will consider
therapy terminated if you do not contact me within 90 days of our last contact,
have missed 2 appointments without notice, have a repeated pattern of cancellation, or if you otherwise do not comply with our agreed plan of payment. You may
contact me to resume therapy at any point, and I will accommodate your request
if possible. If you would like my assistance in locating additional treatment or alternative resources, please feel free to contact me.
An important part of this statement is the outline of a general plan for responding to common clinical situations as well as oblique terminations, thus
establishing parameters of closure. This nonpejorative approach emphasizes
client autonomy and self-direction and accepts the client’s right to terminate
without notice yet offers the opportunity to return or obtain assistance in locating other services. Assuming that clients terminate for many reasons, the
therapist creates a simple structure that acknowledges the possibility of this action, and encourages follow-up if the client wishes to do so. At the same time,
the client is informed of the possibility of a therapist-initiated termination.
Respect and Plan for Personal Limits
Clinicians overall are becoming much more attuned to the importance of attending to personal needs and limits (see Chapter 15). Therapist limits have important and direct implications for termination plans and practices. Sometimes
events in the provider’s life trigger a termination. They move, change jobs, bear
children, get sick, experience role overload, decide to shift career focus or retire. Therapists also have limits to their competence and may have insufficient
skills to address the client’s problems, personal biases that skew their ability to
work effectively with certain persons or groups, or may simply be minding
their own business when a conflict of interest lands in their lap. These circumstances are not always predictable or clear at the outset of therapy.
Competence or Conflict of Interest
Therapists must recognize when personal limits are interfering with the effectiveness of treatment and take steps to resolve the situation (APA, 2002, 2.0;
3.06), possibly terminating therapy. Many times, the therapist can take some
action to remedy the situation and protect the therapy relationship, but this is
not always feasible. Dr. Green is not likely to sell his house so that he can continue providing therapy to Mr. Smith, who has just become his new next-door
neighbor. Or, let’s say the deal falls through and Mr. Smith doesn’t move next
door but has a fundamental religious conversion and is “born again.” Dr. Green
may still need to terminate therapy because he cannot work effectively with religiously enthusiastic individuals due to his personal experience of emotional
and sexual abuse in a religious context. An overdeveloped work ethic can be
dangerous in clinical practice as well. Although most if not all therapists possess
a sincere desire to help, no one possesses the skills and energy needed to treat
all of the patients all of the time. All practitioners need to know the scope of
Effective Termination 403
their competence, and be prepared to terminate treatment if their personal or
professional limits have been reached.
Relocation
When closing or relocating a practice, providers will make provisions to either
finish therapy or transfer clients without abruptly withdrawing service. All
provider-initiated terminations require some notice, explanation, or pretermination counseling. Whether the clients transfer with a provider depends on individual circumstances and the options available. Providers first need to
establish whether client transfer is possible for the provider. Can they accept
the client for continuation in the new practice situation? Clinics or group practices do not “own” clients; they have the right to leave one location and obtain
service elsewhere, provided they fall within the practice profile of the new setting. Suppose Dr. Green leaves the medical center and opens a private practice.
His client, Mr. Smith, simply continues to work with Dr. Green in his new office. If Dr. Green moved from Florida to Montana, however, it would not be
feasible to continue working with Mr. Smith. Likewise, if Dr. Green stayed in
town but moved from the medical center to a job at the Veterans Health Administration hospital, Mr. Smith could transfer with Dr. Green only if he qualified to receive services at the VA clinic. Whether clients end treatment or
transfer to a new setting or a new provider will depend on their assessment of
the relative need for further therapy versus the costs of establishing a new professional relationship.
Providers are advised to check for any state-specific rules or regulations
concerning the relocation or closing of their practice, such as providing notice to
former patients. It may be that some form of public notice is required, such as a
posted notice in the clinic or a newspaper. The intent of such a rule is not to create one more annoying task for the provider, but to alert clients to the change
and allow the courtesy of access to treatment records. We hope that clinicians
want to offer an opportunity for clients to obtain a sense of closure, to communicate with the provider or the provider’s representative if they wish to do so,
and to correct any potential distortions or misinterpretations that the client
might draw in the absence of any explanation for the provider’s change in
venue. It is most helpful to leave contact information at the former site of clinical practice and to check back periodically to assist staff in redirecting inquiries.
Ending Practice
Eventually, all therapists end their practice. Ideally, this will be a well-executed
process at the end of a productive career. Nevertheless, all clinicians must anticipate the possibility of a more precipitous end or significant interruption that
could temporarily or permanently close a practice. Current standards of practice require that provisions are made either in the therapist’s will or as stipulated in a business associates agreement to name a qualified professional who
will handle the closing of practice, transfer of clients, and orderly management
of confidential records in the event of the therapist’s unavailability such as by
accidental death, illness, relocation, or professional unavailability (APA, 2002,
3.12; 10.09). Just as it is wise to establish a contingent guardian for one’s children, so it is important to have a qualified contingent professional to oversee
404 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
the closure and possible transfer of a practice if the clinician could not carry
this out. Those working in an agency or group practice are most likely to establish this agreement within their employment setting. Those working more independently or in solo practice need to take additional steps to establish a
designated person for this important task. It is important to clarify the terms of
such an agreement with the designated person to minimize any potential confusion or distress for clients.
Uncertain Situations
Therapist illness or other personal compromise is a nebulous area that requires
advance plans. If you are sick or distracted, the feasibility of being sufficiently
available needs to be weighed against the level of care needed by clients and the
scope of your practice. It may be necessary to reduce or restrict your practice,
which could mean terminating some clients or services while continuing with
others. Here are a few examples of therapists who all have an active clinical
practice, but are facing personally demanding circumstances:
• Archie has long-term complications from diabetes and has to undergo
kidney dialysis three times per week, as well as monitor his activity level
and avoid contact with those who might carry contagious illnesses.
• Betty is in her first trimester of uncomplicated pregnancy, but is unsure
about whether she and her husband want to hire out infant care or provide full-time parent care.
• Calvin, an only child and sole care manager for his elderly parents who
both require assistance with nursing home and assisted-living arrangements, learns he has serious complications from Crohn’s disease. He not
only needs immediate hospitalization, but will also require multiple surgeries at unpredictable intervals, with extended hospital stays.
• Dionne, a horseback riding enthusiast, is thrown from her horse on a trail
ride, suffers a head injury with loss of consciousness and several broken
ribs, and is hospitalized for several days.
• Elvira reaches a professional crescendo when she learns that her largescale research grant proposal has been funded; she has agreed to advise
three additional students beyond her already full cohort; she has a new
course to prepare; she has just been elected to an office in her professional association; she has committed to chair two symposia at an international conference; and her spouse receives a promotion that requires
extensive out-of-town travel increasing her family responsibilities.
What should each of these therapists do, if anything, about their clinical
practice? Should patient contact be terminated? Of course, the first answer is
“It depends.”
Although it can be difficult for therapists to acknowledge that their own
needs and circumstances constitute legitimate reasons for termination, these
situations might all require termination. Therapists have an ethical responsibility to make appropriate arrangements in the event of their compromised availability or effectiveness. Decisions about what is appropriate are guided by the


client’s readiness to end therapy, and the availability of both parties relative to
the level of care needed by the client. Some clients will move toward ending
therapy if the current provider will no longer be available, others will readily
accept transfer, and others may take a “wait and see” position.
Of the preceding therapist scenarios, Calvin and Elvira closed their clinical
practice in response to changes in their circumstances. Facing immediate and
prolonged medical interventions for his Crohn’s disease, Calvin was physically
unavailable to see his patients. His continuing responsibility for helping his parents combined with his medical situation reasonably absorbed all of his mental
and physical energy, and the resolution of both of these situations was unpredictable in terms of length of time. He had a solo clinical practice, so a designated colleague took possession of the clinical records and assisted him in
contacting current patients to explain the circumstances and assist each one in
a decision regarding further care.
Elvira greatly enjoyed her clinical practice, but had to reassess her overall
academic, clinical, and personal responsibilities. There were simply not enough
hours in the day to meet her role obligations. She tried for a time to jigger her
schedule to continue her practice, but soon realized that even if she was physically present, she did not have the energy to be sufficiently mentally and emotionally present for her clients. She closed her practice more slowly than
Calvin, first declining any new referrals and informing current clients of her
practice closure with 6 weeks’ notice. Most of her clients found this sufficient
time to reach completion of their current treatment, with one exception. This
client had long-standing problems and wanted to transfer to an established,
full-time community provider who would be available long term.
Archie continued practice at a community mental health agency where he
could specifically limit his hours, and alternative providers were readily available in the event of a worsening of his medical condition. He was also diligent
in his self-care, doing what he could to protect his clients from unplanned terminations due to his illness.
Betty continued practicing throughout the duration of her pregnancy, and
made individual arrangements with each client for the period of interruption
for her delivery and maternity leave. She also established a backup plan similar
to that of Calvin for the possible transfer of her clients should she experience
any unexpected medical complications and be rendered immediately unavailable. She informed all new clients of her pregnancy, and did not accept any new
referrals in her last trimester. During her maternity leave, she decided to return
to practice on a limited basis, and to assess her family and work situation over a
longer period. She arranged part-time office hours for continuing clients only,
and did not accept new referrals until she had clarified her new practice profile.
In forming her plans, Betty consulted frequently with her colleague, Barbie,
who had return to work full time after maternity leave. Barbie continued her
practice with the assistance of a full-time nanny and backup babysitters.
Dionne, the horseback rider, thankfully had a rapid recovery without any
long-term deficits, not even a fear of getting back on a horse. Her assistant canceled all her appointments for the duration of her hospitalization, but no decisions were made until the extent of her medical condition was known. As a
provider in an independent practice, she also had a designated colleague who
406 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
was ready to help her assistant with patient management in the event she was
incapacitated. Prior to returning to practice, she was medically evaluated for
any cognitive or physical impairment that could impact her overall competence
to practice.
As these examples illustrate, therapist needs and limits have direct implications for termination. Therapy must be terminated if the provider cannot assure competent, available service; advance provision for abrupt cessation of
service is a professional obligation to reduce the risk of client distress or harm.
Link Termination with Treatment Plans and Goals
Ending is not just a final decision in therapy; it is part of the overall goals for
what therapy is expected to accomplish. The point where therapy ends is a mutually negotiated decision that begins with the initial plan. Completion or discontinuation of the treatment plan is the most likely trigger for termination.
The clarity of the plan for termination thus begins with the clarity of the plan
for treatment. A client may have no idea when therapy should reasonably come
to an end, but a therapist cannot afford this same naiveté. If the therapist has
only a vague idea when the therapy should be concluded, it is likely that the
treatment plan is similarly vague. Difficulty knowing when to end treatment
can be addressed with more specific goals and objectives. A time line might be
useful when the treatment objective is to assist in coping with an ongoing stressor or development issue.
In dealing with a stressful work environment and mercurial boss, the
treatment plan might be to extend therapy over a course of 6 months at which
point the patient’s yearly work evaluation would be complete, and need for
further treatment could be reassessed. Or the treatment plan might be tied to a
specific behavioral goal such as completing a medical evaluation (for the
health-anxious client) or a stable mood state such as minimal depressive symptoms for at least 8 weeks.
Early in therapy, you can ask useful questions about treatment objectives
that pinpoint termination goals and orient the client to think about possible
points of completion. In the middle section of therapy, ongoing review of benefits
and progress toward goals is important to keep the interaction focused and avoid
unhelpful digressions. As therapy progresses in time, the question of ending versus continuing may be easy or may become more challenging. Clarifying the intended point of termination may be difficult, but particularly so if the purpose of
therapy has been lost, forgotten or changed. Throughout therapy, the provider
will want to include termination considerations in the client’s progress notes.
Early on, the provider can connect therapy goals with termination by asking the client, “What do you want to accomplish before we end our work together?” Or
the provider might ask, “When we have reached the close of therapy and consider the
effort a success, what changes have been made?” To bring the consideration of time
limits into the discussion, the provider might offer the following question:
“What is your top priority for the first 10 sessions?” Or perhaps, “If we have only 10
sessions, what are the most pressing concerns you want to address?” The client’s global
objectives can be assessed by asking, “Time limits aside, what would you hope to
gain before stopping therapy?” These questions can be brought up again as im-
Effective Termination 407
provements are made or time limits approach and the question of termination
needs to be reevaluated.
Other primary considerations that have an impact on termination can also
be discussed at this point. Simply asking, “Are there any barriers to your participation in therapy?” can open up a dialogue about factors that might precipitate
early discontinuation.
These questions can lead directly into an orientation to productive use of
therapy. The provider might ask, “Would you like to know how to make the most out
of each session and get the best results?” Presuming that the client will answer yes
to this question, the provider has a logical opening for brief socialization to the
therapy process. The provider summarizes the key aspects of the discussion of
therapy goals and closes with a statement of positive expectation for the work
ahead and its eventual outcome. The closing statement might sound something
like this: “I think I can help you with (reducing your worry and finding more joy in
life). Let’s work together as we’ve discussed and see what kind of progress we can make
in the weeks ahead. If our initial approach works as expected, that’s great; we’ll keep
going toward your goals. If it doesn’t, we’ll figure out what changes to make to keep you
moving in the direction you want to go until you get there. How does this sound to you?”
In a closing statement like this, the provider establishes confidence in
helping the client toward specific ends and an expectation that therapy will end
on a positive note. At the same time, it establishes that initial plans are not a
guarantee of results and should be evaluated for effectiveness along the way.
The agreement to therapy is not a commitment to striving for the sake of striving, it is an agreement to pursue certain results as long as there is a reasonable
expectation that they can be obtained.
Assess Progress, Benefit, and Potential Harm
Assessment of progress, benefit, and potential harm are all routine aspects of
conducting therapy. Bringing termination into these considerations is a fairly
logical step, particularly when it is time to request managed care approval of
additional sessions, or when it is apparent that the goals of the original plan
have been met. Pragmatic considerations require that client and therapist not
only ask, “What kind of progress are we making?” but also consider, “What
kind of progress are we making given the time we have available?” as well as
“Are we ready to stop yet?” and “Do we need to stop?”
There are several possible benchmarks for tracking progress and readiness
for termination (see Table14.1). Standardized measures such as symptom rating scales or structured interviews are wonderful for capturing major improvements, but alone may not always be feasible or sensitive enough for tracking on
a session-by-session basis. It is always important to be alert to signs of the patient’s possible interest in and psychological readiness for termination. This may
be communicated by direct statements such as “I think I’m ready to stop therapy for now,” by obvious progress in symptom resolution or tasks accomplished, or by more indirect hints or suggestions such as missing appointments,
arriving late, or engaging in a mainly peripheral discussion. Clinicians might
use any of the following benchmarks to assess progress and benefit of ongoing
therapy as well as readiness for termination (Davis, 2008).
408 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
There are no clear benchmarks of harm other than specific physical harm.
It is potentially harmful to interfere with clients’ efforts to seek other services
(e.g., telling the client not to seek a second opinion). It may be harmful to fail
to suggest other options when treatment is not working. It is also harmful to
cause more problems than you are helping to solve. Any of the benchmarks of
progress happening in reverse should be cause for concern as a potential indication of harm: The client does not think therapy is worthwhile or getting anywhere; the alliance is strained or hostile and there is desire to withdraw from
contact; the client significantly destabilizes after contact; symptoms are getting
significantly worse in relationship to treatment interventions; functional beTable 14.1 Benchmarks of Client Benefit/Progress and
Termination Readiness
• Subjective sense of purpose and accomplishment linked to therapy sessions: Either one or
both parties have a sense that what they are doing has a valid purpose and that
they are getting somewhere. Clients make spontaneous statements such as “This is
really important,” or “What we did today really helped.” Readiness for termination
will be suggested by a subjective sense of having sufficiently addressed key issues.
• Productive alliance: Client and therapist feel as though they are working as a team.
Positive affect is expressed and the client shares important thoughts and feelings.
Readiness for termination is mainly indicated by a diminished intensity of desire for
contact.
• Stabilization or restabilization following contact: Some clients use therapy to focus their
reality testing and stabilize overall functioning. Readiness for termination is evident
when the client can perform these functions on a more independent basis.
• General symptom reduction: The number and scope of symptoms diminishes and a
range of positive affect is more apparent. Readiness for termination is indicated by
the client’s subjective sense that functioning is returning to “normal”.
• Focused symptom improvement: There may be discrete improvement in a focused area
despite other persistent difficulties, as noted by decreases in specific features of a
symptom cluster. Readiness for termination is indicated by the client’s assertion
that this change is sufficient, in the absence of any imminent risk of self-harm.
• Functional or behavioral changes, including improvements in role adjustment or performance: Important behavior changes are achieved such as returning to work, completing a feared medical test, or attaining a positive evaluation. Movement toward
these changes is noted in affective, cognitive, and behavioral increments across sessions. Readiness for termination is indicated by the client’s assertion of goal attainment and satisfaction.
• Improved family or other system functioning: Attention is focused on relevant issues,
and incremental improvements in organization, affective expression, problem solving, and communication are evident. Readiness for termination is apparent when
the needs of the system are being met and homeostasis is restored.
• Noting benefits in one or more of these areas is vital to an ethical practice: If there is no
benefit in any of these areas over a sustained period of time such as 6 to 8 weeks,
then ethically the provider is obligated to consider termination.
Effective Termination 409
havior or role performance deteriorates; or family and system functioning degenerates. The worst harm would be if the client becomes suicidal and takes action as a result of therapy, a development that would potentially constitute
malpractice. Indications of possible harm do not necessarily mean that therapy
should be immediately terminated. Efforts should be made to address the problem first. If these efforts to remediate the problem are not sufficient, the
provider may want to seek consultation before proceeding with termination.
Modify the Treatment Plan
Altering the treatment plan and renegotiating the goals as therapy progresses is
a necessary part of keeping therapy focused and determining a suitable point of
termination. As old problems are resolved, even older problems may surface to
take their place. For various reasons, termination may come up for consideration sooner or later than originally planned. Reviewing the conceptualization
and treatment plan can revive stalled therapy, crystallize new objectives or pinpoint the remaining tasks. There is nothing inherently wrong with extending a
treatment contract, and in fact, this probably happens quite often. The therapist
bears primary responsibility for negotiating and updating an acceptable and
workable plan and regularly attending to the progress, benefit, and readiness
for termination. These efforts can head off an oblique, complex, or unprofessional termination and increase the likelihood of a positive conclusion.
Pinpoint Typical Reasons for Termination
Let’s consider in more detail some typical reasons therapy comes to a close.
Reasons for termination vary according to degree of predictability, certainty,
salience, and amount of advance notice. These precipitants generally are related to practical, ethical, financial, emotional/motivational, and clinical conditions that are necessary for safely and effectively conducting therapy. As we
look at these reasons, keep in mind that both patient and therapist perspectives
are relevant.
The client and therapist might agree on the reason for termination, they
might negotiate an agreement based on their review of relevant information, or
they might be at an impasse if they disagree on the reason for termination. The
following are some common reasons for terminating therapy. These include
goal attainment, financial issues, practical circumstances, client actions, and
provider-client match. Further discussion of reasons for termination is provided by Younggren and Gottlieb (in press).
Attainment of Initial Goals
Therapy most often ends when the goals have been reached and the client no
longer needs the service. Client and therapist are relatively satisfied with the
outcome, and there is little disagreement or conflict over the decision to end
sessions. Client and therapist formed an agreement to work toward a specified
purpose, and that purpose has been achieved. The client’s goal might be a specific behavior such as driving alone on the interstate. Goals might also be states
of functioning, such as “able to work regularly”; or “living a more relaxed or
joyful life,” with some form of operational measures such as nonclinical levels
410 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
of symptoms to demarcate when the goals can be considered reasonably accomplished. Particularly when a client enters therapy to resolve a crisis, the
main goal for therapy may simply be to resolve the crisis. The client may be
ready for termination as soon as the immediate distress is diminished.
Financial Issues
Providers are ethically obligated to establish an agreement for billing arrangements and compensation at the outset of therapy. If foreseeable circumstances
may limit services because of financial constraints, the provider must address
this as early as possible (APA, 2002, 6.04). The client’s financial situation is an
important parameter of therapy that must be objectively addressed. When financial limits are reached, it is appropriate to terminate treatment, to renegotiate the contract if possible, or to assist the client in transferring to lower cost
alternatives.
The client’s mental health insurance coverage might require preauthorization or limit the number of reimbursable visits. This creates a financial
limit for most clients. Providers usually keep track of the number of sessions
because it is the provider’s responsibility to obtain preauthorization and to
advise the client on changes in the payment structure that occur if authorization is denied. These circumstances could be considered more of a termination alert, as the client might be willing to continue therapy without
insurance coverage. However, this should not be assumed. The issue needs to
be promptly recognized and included in a session agenda so that provider and
client can decide together how they wish to proceed. Thus, the provider approaches the session with awareness that termination is a possible outcome,
and is prepared to provide pretermination counseling. In discussing the options, the provider needs to clarify the financial parameters of treatment continuation and assess the client’s willingness to agree to those new terms. If
maximum insurance benefits have been reached and the client wants to continue, can the client assume financial responsibility for additional service? If
the client has a change in insurance plan that shifts more of the cost to the
consumer, does the client understand and accept this arrangement? If not,
then termination or transfer is indicated.
Outstanding charges or the lack of a timely payment by the client are potential triggers for termination that should not be ignored. Providers who delegate business tasks to administrative staff need to provide enough supervision
to ensure timely attention to preauthorization, insurance claims processing,
and aging accounts receivables. They must also make certain that clients are
aware of the situation, understand their responsibility and are willing to comply
with the financial agreement.
The most emotionally stressful situation may be when the client has an
unpaid balance that must be addressed. In this circumstance, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Timely payment behavior can be shaped from
the beginning of therapy to prevent the accumulation of an unpaid balance.
Providers should be sensitive to the possible exploitation of either themselves
or the client in the making and continuing of financial arrangements. There are
many reasons a client might not comply with fee arrangements, and it is incumbent on the provider to investigate the causes. It may be a simple misun-
Effective Termination 411
derstanding of when and how to make payment or of not having received an accurate or understandable billing statement. There may be contributing marital
or family communication problems because the client delegated the task of bill
payment to spouse, parent, or an accounting service, and there is a snag in the
third-party understanding, agreement, or execution of this task. Sometimes
clients do not intend to pay the charges because they are unhappy with the service, felt pressured into continuing therapy, think that the provider charges too
much, or have overall financial difficulties. Any of these reasons are important
to identify as soon as possible so that appropriate remedies can be implemented. If lack of payment precipitates termination, it is important that the
client understands this reason and has a chance to make prompt payment, particularly if the provider intends to implement formal collection proceedings
(APA, 2002, 10.10, 6.04 (e)).
Practical Circumstances
Practical circumstances have a significant impact on the client’s assessment of
the cost-to-benefit ratio for therapy. There are many costs to the client beyond
just the fees, and it is imperative to be sensitive to these circumstances. Time,
energy, and emotional or social support are also needed to effectively participate in therapy. Costs are relative to the level of available resources and are
perceived by the client in that context. Timing is also important, as the relative
perception of cost shifts when resources improve.
The clients’ assessment of the cost-benefit ratio is integrally linked with
their relative stage of change for the most pressing problems. The motivation
for change affects the client’s perception of the overall costs of therapy. At the
same time, motivation for change is impacted by the overall costs and available
energy. Some of the most significant aspects of therapy rest in helping clients to
assess their motivation for change and effectively titrate their efforts (see Chapter 12). It may be positive and appropriate to terminate therapy when the client
does not have the resources to move forward in the change process.
Clients with high role demands are often challenged to allocate time for
therapy. Despite the benefit of taking time to attend to emotional needs, those
with limited flexibility may experience significant stress in making and keeping
appointments, getting time away from work or home responsibilities, and having to make up missed work or arrange coverage. This stress might lead the
client to choose a different provider with a more convenient location or adaptable hours, or perhaps postpone therapy.
Emotional costs are also important in the client’s cost-benefit assessment.
Therapy takes emotional energy and there must be an adequate available supply. It may be appropriate to postpone or terminate therapy until the client has
more energy to focus on the tasks of treatment. If simply being in therapy
causes the client to lose emotional support or suffer increased discord with significant others, costs escalate. The cost may be too high if the client is getting
the cold shoulder, being interrogated, or is ridiculed for “seeing all those quack
nut doctors.”
Physical distance does not prevent therapy, but it adds to cost and other
risk considerations. There are several contextual elements to consider in determining whether it is reasonable to proceed if therapy requires the client to
412 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
commute a significant distance. Significant distance is relative to the norms of
the area and the specialized nature of the service. A general measure of significant travel is more than an hour of transit time each way. In areas with a low
density of providers or a lack of specialized services, there may be no other option but to commute an hour or more. In most instances, clients will self-select
the service providers who are most convenient or whose location falls within
the clients’ ability to manage transit time.
There are two types of circumstance where authoritative provider judgment is needed. The first is when there is an already established therapy relationship and the client relocates to another geographic area. Reluctance of
either party to terminate may result in efforts to continue therapy in some abbreviated or truncated fashion. Whether this constitutes a reasonable course of
action depends on several factors, including the client’s overall clinical needs,
level of functioning, emotional stability, the new distance, and the availability
of alternative resources. If the client’s needs suggest that greater access to a
provider is necessary, it is incumbent on the original provider to prompt the
client to establish a new therapy relationship by firmly insisting on termination. Despite advanced technology, attempting to maintain therapy via longdistance telecommunication or e-mail is fraught with legal, ethical, and clinical
risks. The lack of face-to-face interaction blunts the overall impact of the interaction (Nickelson, 1998). The client is less likely to benefit and the risks of incompetent service or other potential harm are increased (Fisher, 2003). The
legal and regulatory implications of client and therapist being in two different
states at the time of contact are murky at best. Without a current license to
practice in that jurisdiction, the therapist could be violating clinical practice
laws in the client’s state.
The second type of situation occurs when the client avoids more proximal
providers. Reasons usually include a concern for privacy, a desire to work with
a particular specialist, or a lack of confidence in local resources. These may all
be legitimate concerns, but each should be carefully considered in light of other
information. A stable client who is well known in a small town might travel a
couple of hours to a larger town on a regular basis, combining business, various health care consultations, and visits with family in the distant location.
Compare this with an unstable client who tends to mistrust any provider and
travels great distances in search of someone who will fulfill what are essentially
unrealistic expectations. Unstable clients present many risks, and these may be
multiplied when significant distance is involved. Not the least of these risks is
the difficulty of managing any emergency contacts when physical proximity is
limited.
Client Actions
Clients sometimes abandon their therapy, or they take actions that require termination. A client who stops scheduling appointments may have terminated
therapy. But this is not always clear, as some clients get distracted or have
symptoms such as anxiety or depression that interfere with the responsible action of following up. It is not unusual for a client to fail to show for a scheduled
visit or not schedule a follow-up, yet this is always taken in the context of the
client’s usual behavior, current issues, and overall progress. It is important to
Effective Termination 413
have a practice policy on no-shows and broken contacts so that the provider
can establish a boundary around client-initiated terminations. Sometimes a
simple prompt is useful in refocusing therapy. At other times, the client’s failure
to follow up is an indication of the intent to terminate. If the client could benefit from more therapy, the therapist can encourage the client to return. In our
managed care environment, it is now common practice to work with clients in
repeated segments of therapy where there may be multiple points of “soft” closure rather than a single point of final termination.
It is always useful to seek more information on the client’s intention and
to attempt a closing consultation. This may be impossible if the client does not
respond to reasonable follow-up inquiries. With clients who repeatedly cancel
and reschedule, the provider will establish the limits on what is tolerable before
declining to reschedule another appointment, as some sort of predictable participation is a necessary condition for progress.
Client actions that are dangerous to the provider create conditions where
it is unsafe and unproductive to continue the work. Termination is the appropriate response when the client makes threats to the provider or the provider’s
significant others (e.g., the client described early in the chapter, who threatened to stalk and harm her provider for not writing a fitness-for-duty letter).
Other examples include threats to sue the provider or take any sort of legal action, or any criminal behavior that targets the provider such as stealing or damaging office property.
Provider-Client Match
Termination may be appropriate if the client and provider are not well
matched, if the provider does not have the right skills for dealing with the problem at hand, or if the client has not established a clear plan for working with a
single provider. Multiple providers working with a single client usually function in an integrated manner, each contributing in a specific way as part of a
team. A client might work with a nurse practitioner for medication management, a psychologist for individual therapy, and a family counselor for marital
issues. Working with multiple providers at the same level of intervention (e.g.,
individual therapy) is counterproductive.
Clients often interview several therapists before settling with one, or talk
to someone for a second opinion. If clients schedule a second or third session,
they should be encouraged to focus on one therapeutic relationship and to terminate the other, or to explicitly plan a brief and directed consultation. The
provider must be careful not to discourage clients’ autonomy or right to seek
multiple opinions. It is important to discuss the therapeutic issues with clients
and try to reduce any confusion or conflict while helping them come to a decision that best meets their needs (APA, 2002, 10.04).
Providers want to encourage arrangements that help clients build trust
and emotional involvement in therapy, basic ingredients for effective work.
When a client consults a new provider, whether by choice or necessity, the
current therapist helps the client negotiate the process of termination, if that
is appropriate. The second provider will proceed with sensitivity and caution,
but may need to either help the client with the termination decision or
redirect the client back to the original therapist. The biggest quandary for
414 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
relatively stable clients who simply want to explore a different approach, or
who should make a change for other circumstantial reasons is the interpersonal anxiety associated with leaving or “firing” the established therapist.
Talking this through will help most clients sort out their feelings and come to
a reasoned decision. Although the client has the right to terminate without
notice, it is helpful to encourage some closing communication with the discontinued provider, either in a session, with a phone or e-mail message or in
a letter, depending on the client’s preference.
When providers determine that they do not have the appropriate skills to
help a client or be effective in therapy, they should redirect the client to other
resources as soon as possible. Often this mismatch becomes evident relatively
quickly, during the first session or first few sessions. A mismatch can also become apparent later in therapy as new information becomes available or as the
client’s concerns shift. Providers who, after giving thoughtful consideration to
the option of treating a client, do not feel appropriate for the job should handle
termination tactfully and respectfully but remain firm in their professional
judgment. The client’s preferences, while they are important, cannot determine
the scope of the provider’s competence.
Six Essential Steps
All professional actions should be systematic and follow a consistent process.
The following six essential steps will guide clinicians through implementing
termination. These six steps will ensure that the provider has followed a clinically and ethically appropriate process:
1. Recognize triggers for termination. These were described in this chapter.
2. Review the clinical and emotional context. Begin preparation for termination
by anticipating the client’s potential emotional and behavioral responses.
Bear in mind that individual responses will reflect each person’s clinical
history and status, emotional propensities, coping strategies, and current
stress level.
3. Identify any legal, ethical, and contractual limits. Next, assess whether any
legal, ethical, or contractual circumstances affect termination. Some of
these circumstances are absolute in that the provider has little room for
judgment or negotiation. Others have some relative degrees of freedom or
room for discretion. A systematic series of questions ensures attention to
each critical issue:
• Are there any legally or ethically compelling reasons for termination?
• Are there legally or ethically compelling reasons to delay or postpone
termination?
• Are there contract issues that have to be considered?
4. Consider risks and strategies for risk management. No termination is completely risk-free, although most risks can be sufficiently managed, especially when approached with forethought and strategic effort. Different
areas of risk include adverse outcomes in clinical, emotional, and profes-
Effective Termination 415
sional domains. The client gets worse, there is emotional distress to the
client or provider, or the provider might be subject to legal action or professional discipline. The magnitude of any of these risks can range from
mere inconvenience to major fiasco. A combination of risks may also be
more than just a simple sum as a single risk may exponentially escalate
the magnitude of the other risks. It is worthwhile to consider overall risk
exposure along a continuum of potential for adverse outcomes to establish an appropriate level of intensity for mediating efforts. It is hazardous
to consider anything a minor risk, yet some risks need more vigilance and
planning on the part of the provider.
5. Provide pretermination counseling. Pretermination counseling occurs over
the course of one to three sessions that mark the end of a particular segment of therapy. There are two main objectives for this pretermination
discussion. The first objective is to provide notice of termination and discuss the circumstances. In this discussion, it should be possible to evaluate
the client’s needs, preferences, and options. The second objective is to provide a forum for the client to express feelings, to check perceptions, or ask
questions about the termination and to receive any helpful feedback or
practical information to facilitate the transition. There may be times when
client actions or the third-party payer’s limits preclude pretermination
counseling (APA, 2002, 10.10 (c)). Encouraging participation in a termination session is generally useful, but extreme or repeated efforts to contact the client are not usually necessary or advisable.
6. Establish the disposition and note in client’s record. Disposition can be established during the pretermination consultation, which might extend beyond
the final face-to-face meeting if follow-up contact by telephone is necessary. Notes on the termination discussion, with reference to each of the
preceding steps, are entered into the client’s record, including the closing
outcome. Any further telephone contacts should also be noted, as well as
possible written correspondence. Creating an adequate record of each step
taken is both an opportunity for the provider to reflect on the work and
draw a sense of closure as well as a basic professional task. If the client or
any other providers ever have questions about what transpired, the record
will reflect the degree of professional integrity that was maintained.
Prevent and Defuse Volatile Situations
Many risky or contentious clinical interactions can be averted by regularly following the six outlined steps. When snags or difficulties are encountered, it is
helpful to seek peer consultation for ideas and emotional support in managing
those challenges. This helps the provider to ensure that his or her decisions are
consistent with the community standard of care. What’s more, it is powerful
proof that the provider intended to maintain a high standard of care by making
this effort. Professional consultation on issues of risk management is essential
for any volatile, conflicted or potentially legally contentious situation. It is especially important to obtain consultation that is both professionally qualified
and confidential for matters of legal threat.
Several other general strategies are useful for managing emerging risks. A
practitioner who believes that a client is not benefiting from treatment still
should not terminate the service during an acute phase of a crisis when there is
any risk of self-harm. Instead, the provider has a duty to address the client’s
immediate safety prior to examining the suitability of termination, and to provide a reasonable referral. The provider is not obligated to retain the client
until a new therapy relationship is settled, as it is unethical and highly risky to
continue unproductive therapy with an unstable client.
If a client intentionally misrepresents basic information needed for therapy
such as presenting a false identity or fabricated clinical symptoms, termination is
warranted. The basic trust required for psychotherapy has been compromised,
and the therapist has significant cause to suspect the patient’s motives. Because
the therapeutic enterprise is based on trust (APA, 2002, Principle B) any action
that substantially disrupts this foundation becomes a reason for termination.
Similarly, many therapists would consider the therapeutic alliance irreparably compromised if the client tried to engage the therapist in a fraudulent action.
Requesting that the therapist make untrue statements such as an inappropriate
diagnosis for insurance purposes, billing insurance for missed appointments as if
the services were rendered, or making statements of fact that are not true to gain
disability reimbursement, entry into jobs or military service, child custody, or
any number of possible situations are attempts to conspire with the therapist in
commission of fraud, which could result in professional censure or possible loss
of licensure as well as other legal charges. If the client attempts to use therapy or
the therapist, the therapist must refuse to cooperate.
The psychologist’s ethics code allows for therapy termination if the
provider is threatened or otherwise endangered by the patient or someone associated with the patient (APA, 2002, 10.10 (b)). This standard of conduct is
broad enough to allow for judging a range of possible circumstances where the
best and most reasonable action is clinical termination. It also provides the clinician with a means of defending such action should the patient make retaliatory charges of unethical behavior. What constitutes a threat or endangerment
can include verbal or physical threats (Fisher, 2003). Termination under these
adverse conditions can occur precipitously, without pretermination counseling
or referral, and may include efforts to seek protective services from legal authorities if appropriate (APA, 2002, 10.10 (c); 4.05 (b) (3)).
If a patient or the patient’s significant other threatens to file a lawsuit or
professional complaint, it would obviously be preferable to try to resolve the
dispute prior to legal action. It is important to take all complaints seriously,
and attempt to fix the problem. If this is not possible, termination is indicated
(Younggren, 2004). If the patient has taken any formal legal action against the
therapist, then therapy should be immediately terminated with no further
communication and personal legal counsel obtained. As noted, consultation is
an essential step in managing any termination related to verbal, physical, or
legal threats.
Follow-Through and Follow-Up
If time allows, it can be helpful to reduce the frequency and increase the time
interval between sessions. This creates an opportunity for the client to practice
416 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
new skills or continue self-directed efforts with decreasing input from the therapist. Termination is more gradual and natural, with sessions fading out over
time. There is time to process the client’s remaining concerns and diffuse the
initial emotional responses. Clients as well as therapists may experience some
emotional discomfort even with a reasonable and appropriate termination. It is
easier to end therapy when goals have been met, the client is satisfied and ready
to end treatment, and the therapist feels a sense of mastery in the finished
work. However, not all terminations feel complete. It is harder to end therapy
without time to process whatever regrets, frustrations, or anxiety might be associated with the termination. Discussing any feelings such as these is an important part of termination follow-through.
The fading approach also helps to reinforce a coping versus mastery objective in therapy. This is an opportunity to review with the client the specific actions, skills, or changes that have been useful, and to prepare the client for
coping with potential challenges ahead. The client might be encouraged to systematically schedule times for “self-therapy,” during which he or she reviews
issues, checks symptoms, pinpoints problems, plans homework activities, anticipates challenges, and schedules the next self-therapy session (J. Beck,
1995). Self-therapy might include adaptive homework such as weekly exercise,
regular social contacts, scheduled activity for pleasure and accomplishment, or
a “booster” visit with the therapist.
A common termination dilemma occurs when the client makes a bid for
some sort of personal contact or relationship after therapy. It is quite natural to
want to extend a positive interpersonal experience, so this should not be a total
surprise nor is it necessarily a bad sign. Because therapy is a personal service,
mental health professionals have a special obligation to be clear about personal
and professional boundaries to avoid any appearance of impropriety. The decision of whether to allow posttermination contact should be based on sound
professional judgment. Some therapists might disallow or discourage any contact following termination. Others might encourage contact, but frame it
clearly as a follow-up professional contact in a professional setting. Having contact of a social nature once therapy has terminated ventures into a fuzzy area,
where it is not clear if the contact is therapy or friendship or something else.
Any sexual contact is explicitly prohibited for at least 2 years following the
final professional contact, and even thereafter is apt to be highly questionable behavior (see APA, 2002, 10.08). Other social contact is less clearly defined in the
code of conduct (APA, 2002), allowing room for professional and personal judgment, or misjudgment as the case may be. Key aspects of this judgment involve
spotting reasonably foreseeable risks and taking action to avoid, minimize, or
manage any risk of harm to the other person. According to Younggren and Gottlieb
(2004), the patient’s history, diagnosis and level of psychological functioning as
well as the nature and length of the therapy are all important in determining how
the practitioner should manage possible contacts outside a formal therapy setting.
Summary
Effective termination does not just happen; it is based on a sound strategy. The
two main components of a termination strategy are ongoing dialogue about
Effective Termination 417
termination and a reasonable plan of action. The positive quality of a termination is determined to a large degree by how well the client and therapist communicate about this important decision. Terminations do not all look alike and
it is helpful to identify the good and bad variations. Six types of termination describe a spectrum of different endings. Premature termination is an unclear
label that often refers to ending therapy without a sense of closure or completion. Premature termination may reflect a therapist bias toward long-term over
short-term treatment. Prospective termination is planned in advance and includes a clear rationale and an opportunity to process thoughts and feelings
about termination. Prospective termination is typically mutually agreeable and
uncomplicated. Flexible termination is used when conditions require an interruption of therapy or when the client is unsure about the need for further treatment. Complex termination involves difficulties in the planning and
communication about termination and strong affect associated with ending sessions. Complex termination may be connected to personality disorders or secondary gain. Oblique termination is an abrupt termination that is unilaterally
enacted by the client with highly ambiguous or potentially negative emotional
tones. Unprofessional termination involves provider actions in ending therapy
that fall below a reasonable standard of care.
The clinician’s competence in termination is based on having a clear grasp
of professional standards, role expectations, ethical guidelines, and clinical
needs of individual clients. Applied skills are needed to implement the termination strategy and achieve positive closure under the varying circumstances in
clinical practice. These skills include the ability to communicate effectively
about termination, to characterize one’s practice and form a policy on termination, to plan for one’s limits and potential vulnerabilities, to incorporate termination into the treatment plan and goals, to systematically monitor and evaluate
client progress, to modify the treatment plan in response to new information, to
follow a systematic course of action when implementing termination, to manage the risks of volatile situations, and finally, to create a productive transition
and manage the outer limits of follow-up contacts without compromising professional standards or harming the client.
418 Basic Techniques for Clinicians—Intervention
WH AT EVERY CLINICIAN
NEEDS TO KNOW
Chapter 15 Self-Care and Ethics: Applying the
Techniques of Positive Psychology
PART
I V

421
15
Chapter
Self-Care and Ethics: Applying the
Techniques of Positive Psychology
Psychologists dedicate their careers to advancing the well-being of others
and caring for their clients. Like many other professionals, however, they
do not always practice what they preach. The profession is working hard to encourage psychologists to be mindful of self-care and to support those whose
self-care falters. This chapter identifies sources of potential burnout and offers
suggestions for self-care and for care of colleagues. We highlight sensitive topics and challenging aspects of therapy that are difficult to navigate with clear
minds, and even more difficult under fatigued, burned out, or impaired conditions. We explore clients’ and therapists’ vulnerable thoughts and feelings including anger, pity, sexual attraction, and identification, and their resultant
behaviors. We want to help new clinicians be alert for these aspects of therapeutic relationships that they might not otherwise expect, and to think about
the best ethical practices for managing these risks. We offer suggestions for selfmonitoring, self-care, pitfalls to avoid in therapy, and effective coping strategies
that emphasize the principles of positive psychology. Finally, we extend these
principles to the important matter of caring for colleagues.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Describe the symptoms of therapist burnout.
• Identify at least three deterrents to confronting burnout or impairment in
oneself or for colleagues. Consider how to address these obstacles ethically.
• List at least five symptoms of therapists’ problems in reacting to clients.
422 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
• List 10 self-care practices for therapists.
• Describe how to care for colleagues.
• Explain how positive psychology relates to burnout.
In this book, we have explored why people become clients, and how to assess and treat a wide variety of difficulties ranging from mild distress to pervasive personality problems or antisocial behavior. We have considered methods
to encourage and instill change, monitor progress and outcomes, and recognize
difficulties in this process. This chapter aims to help readers turn this knowledge inward to prepare for self-reflection, self-evaluation, and self-care. To get
yourself thinking about this topic, answer the following questions: What have
you done for yourself today? What activities have you engaged in this week
that have helped you relax, laugh, and feel good? How regularly do you do
these things? Every day? Every week? Every month? Do you consider your
self-care, recreation, and work balanced?
Too often, the person in therapy least cared for is the therapist. Yet, clinical
psychologists serve as role models to many constituencies, such as students, colleagues, workshop attendees, and clients. It would seem that psychologists and
therapists should practice what they preach or help others achieve across the
biopsychosocial domains. Many of them do. However, therapists like all human
beings (including their clients), are susceptible to the stressors and challenges of
major and minor life events. Some have better coping strategies than others, some
have had better role models than others, and individuals’ ability to effectively
self-monitor and achieve self-change varies considerably. Most everyone can
think of times where they have responded to stressful situations in less than optimal ways. Can you think of times when you have responded to stressors (persons,
situations, or events) in ways that have left you feeling embarrassed, guilty, regretful, or more stressed? We hope that these examples have been exceptions
rather than the norm. Yet, when you are vulnerable, and the impact of the stressors seems unmanageable, increasingly irrational and inappropriate responses
often lead to personal and professional problems. Psychologists who are burned
out might have clouded judgment or skewed perceptions that could lead to unethical or unprofessional behavior. Alternatively, assuming a knowledge base of
ethics is in place, ongoing practice of self-care and maintenance of mental health
should increase the likelihood that ethical standards are followed and American
Psychological Association’s (APA) aspirational ethical principles are upheld.
Students are encouraged to learn the ethical obligations professionals
have in recognizing and responding to self- and colleague-impairment. Understanding the burnout syndrome and ways to assess this phenomenon is deeply
important for students in training, and following degree completion. Lack of
self-care can lead to burnout, and it, in turn, may to lead to unethical or unprofessional behavior. Therapists suffering from burnout might be impaired or exhibit problematic behavior.
Understanding psychologist burnout, psychological morbidity, high-risk
therapist behaviors, and management of personal reactions to clients builds
awareness of stressors, and ways to deal with them through self-care. The positive psychology movement has provided new ways to look at self-care and the
Self-Care and Ethics 423
prevention of burnout and impairment. Positive psychology prescribes self-care
practices to increase happiness, optimism, satisfaction, creativity, and moderators of stress for clinicians. Increasing positive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
(self-care) may help decrease burnout, and maladaptive, and perhaps, unethical behaviors in professional practice.
Ethics, Impairment, Personal Problems, and Burnout
The Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (APA, 2002), Standard
2.06 titled “Personal Problems and Conflicts,” offers the following guidelines:
(a) psychologists refrain from initiating an activity when they know or should
know that there is a substantial likelihood that their personal problems will
prevent them from performing their work-related activities in a competent
manner.
(b) When psychologists become aware of personal problems that may interfere
with their performing work-related duties adequately, they take appropriate
measures, such as obtaining professional consultation or assistance, and determine whether they should limit, suspend, or terminate their work-related duties. (p. 1064)
On first sight, these standards seem quite clear, but professionals also must recognize that many individuals who become patients or clients do so only after
negative consequences arise in their personal or professional life. Insight about
your own emotional or affective, cognitive, or behavioral dysregulation or interpersonal problems may be lacking at the onset of difficulty. How then are
psychologists supposed to self-evaluate their competency or impact of personal
stressors if their judgment is impaired due to stress, distress, or poor coping with
life events? When does having a few “bad days” turn into having problems?
Since the APA Ethics Code of Conduct is intended to be a guide that relies heavily on “professional judgment of psychologists” compared with others “engaged
in similar activities in similar circumstances, given the knowledge the psychologist had or should have had at the time,” (APA, 2002, p. 1060) there is a need to
look elsewhere to answer this complicated question or set of questions.
We begin with a discussion of impairment and problematic behavior as they
pertain to our professional roles. Judgment was discussed in Chapter 8, with
regard to biases and heuristics in clinical decision making, and a review of this
information would be helpful. The core competencies, and therefore, core curriculum expected of professional psychologists are detailed in Chapter 2 and
also warrant a review.
Impairment
The difficulty in identifying impairment stems partly from the profession’s difficulty in defining the term. The psychology literature defines impairment in
many ways, ranging from specific behaviors to broad individual characteristics
424 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
that hamper professional performance. A review of the literature (Barnett &
Hillard, 2001) summarizes distress and impairment as existing along a continuum, and referring to sexual misconduct, substance abuse, emotional, and
mental health issues. Barnett and Hillard also equate impairment to disorders
diagnosable on Axis I, II, or III of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994).
Without knowing exactly what impairment is, how can we know if someone is impaired? Furthermore, how can we help someone who might be impaired? Similar questions were asked of intern supervisors in counseling
centers known to be active in addressing supervisees’ competence problems
(Gizara & Forrest, 2004). These experts also had difficulty defining impairment. Their institutional policies also did not provide clear operational definitions of impairment to help them make this determination. Analysis of
interview content (Gizara & Forrest, 2004), revealed conceptual themes about
impairment suggesting that impaired interns engaged in professionally harmful
or deficient and persistent patterns of behavior. Supervisors related that impaired intern behaviors represented diminished functioning (change in performance), and deficient skills (broadly defined). Skills deficits included basic skill
sets (e.g., interviewing, delivery of therapeutic intervention), interpersonal
difficulties due to lack of self-awareness, and lack of professional responsibility.
Skill deficits represented the majority of examples provided.
Students’ attitudes toward impaired peers in clinical psychology training
programs were solicited in an e-mail survey (Oliver, Bernstein, Anderson, Blashfield, & Roberts, 2004). The operational definition of “student impairment”
(Lamb et al., 1987) was described as interference in professional functioning in
one or more of the following areas: (a) an inability and/or unwillingness to acquire and integrate professional standards into one’s repertoire of professional
behavior; (b) an inability to acquire professional skills to reach an acceptable
level of competency; (c) an inability to control personal stress, psychological dysfunction and/or excessive emotional reactions that interfere with professional
functioning (p. 598).
The definition was summarized to study participants to describe impaired
or problem students as those who “experience difficulties associated with interpersonal problems, substance abuse, Axis II disorders, and so forth and are consequently unable to meet the expectations of their programs” (p. 142).
Reflecting on this definition, students stated that impairment was most frequently evidenced by depression and other mood disorders, personality disorders or traits, anxiety disorder, eating disorders, substance abuse problems,
burnout, lack of timely preparedness, and interpersonal boundary concerns.
Impairment among student-colleagues and professionals negatively impacts
others within the profession, and those served by the impaired, therefore others’ perceptions provide important insight into shaping a definition.
At times, impairment has been confused with disability, as defined by the
American Disabilities Act. This term confusion is problematic because many disabilities would not negatively impact professional performance or delivery of
service. Because surveys suggest that it is unclear whether professionals and
students define impairment the same way, the term professional impairment was
suggested to focus on specific difficulties that may “impede or interfere with
Self-Care and Ethics 425
professional responsibilities” (e.g., deficient knowledge, limited clinical skills,
inadequate technical skills, poor judgment, and disturbing interpersonal attributes; Oliver et al., 2004, p. 146). Others (Gizara & Forrest, 2004; Kutz, 1986)
suggest that impairment should be reserved for describing diminished functioning, while those whose performance has not decreased, but rather has never
achieved sufficiency or proficiency should be deemed “not competent.” “Unqualified” might also be appropriate for this latter category. “Problematic” behaviors seem to be less well attended to in the literature and likely refers to
questionable behaviors that are borderline inappropriate. Problematic behaviors
that might warrant concern by trainers, supervisors, or colleagues often precede
impairment. If poor judgment leads to poor skill delivery, but does not quite
cause harm, perhaps the clinician’s behaviors are problematic. Likewise, students or professionals whose behaviors are interpersonally distasteful, abrasive,
or distancing among colleagues, but not among clients, might be considered
problematic within an academic or professional setting, but not grounds for discontinuance of practice. Practitioners who seem hostile, labile, or irresponsible
in ways that are not illegal or unethical might be labeled as problematic and
would likely benefit from early intervention or approach by colleagues or superiors. Problematic might describe subclinical or prediagnostic impairment.
A clear operational definition for impairment is lacking in the psychology
literature. Definitions vary from specific to broad, from focus on legal definitions to ethical considerations, from diagnostic categories to syndromes. The
seminal review article by Forrest, Elman, Gizara, and Vacha-Hasse (1999) concludes that the field of professional psychology defines impairment broadly,
with a focus on diminished role functioning of a qualified professional resulting from distress, burnout, or substance use, and sometimes resulting in unethical, incompetent, and compromised professional behavior. Burnout may be a
common cause of impairment, yet it is another poorly understood construct.
Burnout
Burnout has been defined as a “psychological syndrome in response to chronic
interpersonal stressors on the job” (Maslach, Schaufeli, & Leiter, 2001, p. 399).
There are three major components to burnout: emotional exhaustion, feelings of
depersonalization (detachment from the job), and self-perception of lack of accomplishment or ineffectiveness on the job. Maslach et al. (2001), pioneers and
forerunners in the field of burnout theory and research, suggest that stress is
captured by the construct of emotional exhaustion and refers to feeling depleted of one’s emotional and physical resources, and extended beyond one’s
perceived or real resources. Cynicism or depersonalization is characterized by
negative feelings and detachment from one’s job, representing the interpersonal context dimension of burnout. Personal accomplishment or perceived
lack thereof, represents one’s self-evaluation of job efficacy.
Qualitative investigations and case studies on burnout originated with a
focus on professionals in human services and health care workers, whose job
focus was on their relationships with service recipients and coworkers. Thus,
the importance of the relationship competency described earlier in this book
(Chapter 2) is highlighted again in the context of the burnout syndrome, in
426 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
which impairment in this domain of professional functioning is a key defining
factor. Early writings on burnout were anecdotal and conceptual, beginning in
the 1970s. Empirical studies on burnout emerged in the early 1990s, approximately 15 to 20 years after the initial introduction of the concept, partially due
to the development of objective measures of the tripartite phenomenon. Today,
the Maslach Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey (MBI-HSS; Maslach &
Jackson, 1981) and the Maslach Burnout Inventory-Educators Survey (MBIES; Maslach, Jackson, Leiter, & Schaufeli, 1996) are two resources for psychologists’ assessment of burnout in clients and perhaps themselves. Other versions
exist for professionals outside human services and health care workers and educators. Interestingly, these measures do not generate a burnout “score” or rating; instead, the three constructs remain distinct factors of the overall concept
of burnout. Yet, these tools have allowed investigators to quantitatively research contributing factors, influences and consequences of burnout. This research led to more refined theory and understanding of the constructs of
burnout and their relationships to each other. Further explanation of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and personal accomplishment follows.
Although emotional exhaustion and/or job-related stress is a core component of burnout, stress and exhaustion alone do not constitute burnout. It is the
impact the stress and exhaustion have on one’s attitude, work effort and performance, and interactions with others that represent the construct of burnout.
Someone who is burned out might be stressed and exhausted, and therefore,
puts little effort into her client’s sessions, cares little about getting paperwork
done, and has trouble feeling energized about her job for an extended period.
This is different from the transient stress people may feel because they are running late for work or have an impending deadline to meet, and therefore, are
short-tempered or tired on a given day.
Emotional exhaustion prompts actions that emotionally and cognitively
distance the professional from the work, perhaps as a coping mechanism
(Maslach et al., 2001). Working with terminally ill patients is intense work that
some professionals might deem depressing or hopeless. Likewise, some professionals might maintain this impression of working with inner-city, abused children of drug-addicted parents. These professionals are not likely to choose
careers in working with these populations; this does not constitute burnout. In
comparison, professionals who choose to work with such clients or patients
might find times within their careers when they have a series of difficult interactions with patients, or have become invested in clients whose ultimate outcomes differ dramatically from what was aspired. Burnout theory suggests that
when many successive or simultaneous situations, or even one significant one
such as this occurs, and the professionals’ coping resources are taxed or not
buffering the job stress, they might inadvertently withdraw from other clients,
colleagues, or their job responsibilities to protect themselves from further disappointment, hurt, or frustration.
Undergraduate and graduate students alike often refer to themselves as
burned out toward the end of an academic term, year, or completion of a major
milestone (degree, practicum, internship, and dissertation). Can you think of
times in your professional or academic history when you felt drained and exhausted, despite getting adequate sleep? At that time, maybe you cared less
Self-Care and Ethics 427
about completing work in an ideal fashion than just completing it? Have there
been times when you postponed returning phone calls to classmates or coworkers, or have avoided other responsibilities related to school or work because you
didn’t feel like you had the energy? Perhaps you can think of time when your
frustration tolerance was particularly low, and you found yourself to be irritated with your professors or colleagues for what others might perceive as
minor wrongdoings or delays? While answers to these questions don’t necessarily indicate that you were burned out, certainly further self-reflection would
be indicated. Distancing seems to be an immediate reaction to exhaustion, according to studies on burnout that reveal a strong relationship between exhaustion and depersonalization, across settings (Maslach et al., 2001).
The preceding questions do not ask about irregularities in your eating
habits, mental acuity, or gastrointestinal functioning-vegetative symptoms
often associated with depression, which are less likely to be experienced by
persons who are burned out. In fact, professionals understand burnout and depression to be different phenomenon (Bakker et al., 2000). Research distinguishes burnout from depression in that it is job-related, situation-specific, and
limited to the work context, whereas depression impacts and is experienced in
all aspects of one’s life (Maslach et al., 2001). Persons who experience burnout
may not have ever experienced depression or other psychopathology. This underscores the importance of professionals’ and students’ ability to recognize the
key aspects of burnout within themselves and others, because it presents differently than the depression clinical psychologists are used to identifying. Although different from depression, burnout may still constitute impairment in
professionals who suffer extreme symptoms and manifest inappropriate behaviors consistent with this phenomenon.
The concept of personal accomplishment or job-related self-efficacy is related to emotional exhaustion and depersonalization in a more complex way
(Maslach et al., 2001). It appears that there are reciprocal interactions between
exhaustion and personal accomplishment, and personal accomplishment and
depersonalization. Chronic job-related stress might lead to decreased personal
accomplishment, and decreased personal accomplishment might lead, therefore, to increased depersonalization and exhaustion. Furthermore, if professionals are detached from their work and work relationships, it is unlikely that
they will experience feelings of personal accomplishment. The three constructs
of burnout possibly develop simultaneously, rather than sequentially, but more
research is needed to ferret out these relationships. Experts in the field suggest
that work overload and social conflict contribute most significantly to emotional exhaustion and depersonalization, whereas lack of relevant resources
likely contributes most significantly to decreased personal accomplishment
(Maslach et al., 2001).
The concepts of burnout and the burnout syndrome are complex. Many
practicing professionals are likely to have experienced or will experience some
degree of burnout during their academic pursuits, professional practice, or career at large. Yet, when do these experiences cross the line from “normal and
transient” to “dysfunctional” and “interfering” with professional judgment and
work, and therefore, ethically concerning? When does socially acceptable
burnout turn into impairment? Or, as some suggest based on a review of the
428 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
literature (Forrest et al., 1999), is there no difference between the two? While
exact equations or recipes do not exist to answer these questions, a look at the
prevalence of burnout and impairment in student and professional practice
might raise awareness to the possibilities.
How Common Is Burnout and Impairment in Training and
Professional Practice?
General statistics on the incidence and prevalence of burnout and impairment
in training programs and professional practice are difficult to quote with certainty due to limited reports of this information and variations in methodology
to gather such data. Studies mostly focus on specific subgroups of mental
health professionals and psychologists such as those who work with traumatized or maltreated children or adults (e.g., Azar, 2000; Collins & Long, 2003;
Sabin-Farell & Turpin, 2003; Salston & Figley, 2003; Stevens & Higgins, 2002),
substance abuse counselors (e.g., Mack, 2004; Shoptaw, Stein, & Rawson,
2000), older adults (e.g., Spear, Wood, Chawla, Devis, & Nelson, 2004), or
those practicing outside the United States (Brown, Prashantham, & Abbott,
2003). Studies examining correlates and factors related to burnout and impairment might underestimate the prevalence and incidence of these phenomena
due to self-selection biases. Many of those who participate might be willing to
do so because they are not feeling particularly stressed or burned out. However, several review articles and studies have attempted to summarize more
general findings from objective sources.
Based on the four studies of rates of impairment in training that were
conducted between 1982 and 1991, more than two-thirds of all surveyed programs reported having at least one impaired student within the 5 years prior to
study participation (Forrest et al., 1999). Furthermore, data suggest that all
programs identified at least one impaired student each year for the 5-year period (Forrest et al., 1999).
In a more recent professional competence survey of 71 representatives of
graduate programs in clinical, school, or counseling psychology, almost half of
the respondents reportedly had at least one student with limited clinical skills.
Personality and emotional problems were frequently the cause of this problem
(Procidano, Busch-Rossnagel, Reznikoff, & Geisinger, 1995). A large majority
of respondents (89%) had experience with at least one student who exhibited
nonacademic or professional deficiencies (Procidano et al.). Similar statistics
were provided by department heads of American Psychological Associationaccredited professional psychology training programs, suggesting that two to
three impaired students per program were identified within a 5-year period
(Schwebel & Coster, 1998).
Self-reports of professional psychology students’ perception of impairment or burnout are limited. However, an exploratory study of over 1,000 clinical psychology graduate students (mostly female) showed that approximately
75% of these students, most of whom were in PhD programs, had received psychotherapy for various reasons (personal growth, impairment, family issues,
adjustment, etc.) at some time either during or prior to graduate studies. A
closer look at statistics related to impairment revealed varied reasons for seek-
Self-Care and Ethics 429
ing therapy. Over half the respondents sought therapy for depression, or “adjustment or developmental issues.” Another 20% of the sample sought therapy
for problems with spouse or significant other, or for other interpersonal issues.
Finally, just under 10% sought therapy for suicidal ideation; eating disorders;
physical assault, abuse, or sexual abuse; or substance abuse (Holzman,
Searight, & Hughes, 1996). Respondents rarely told their supervisors they were
in therapy. Assuming the findings are generalizable, these results suggest,
therefore, that training directors’ reports of impairment, burnout, or students’
“problems” might underrepresent the frequency in which students experience
such difficulties. This disparity also highlights the possibility that not all experiences of depression or other mental health concerns by students and professionals result in impairment or diminished functioning by practitioners, despite
the frequency with which these phenomena apparently occur.
In professional practice, early studies show that many professional psychologists experience psychological distress, and continue to work while
doing so (Guy, Poelstra, & Stark, 1989; Pope et al., 1987). In fact, in a study of
456 practicing psychologists, approximately 60% reported that they continued to work despite being too distressed to function effectively (Pope et al.,
1987). You can probably think of a time when you or some friends were so
stressed out that you had trouble paying attention in class, or maybe didn’t
perform as well on an exam because you were distracted, so these statistics
seem reasonable. When considering the changes in judgment, attention, concentration, and memory people tend to experience under distress, it is frightening to think of the potential negative impact psychologists could have on
their clients as a result.
In a survey study of 304 Tennessee psychologists, respondents estimated
that 19% of their colleagues had psychological conditions (including substance
abuse) that rendered them impaired in their practice (Floyd, Myszka, & Orr,
1998). Respondents reportedly had concerns that at least one or two colleagues
were impaired at the time of survey. When asked to think about the past year,
psychologists estimated that nearly 30% of their colleagues suffered impairment in that time frame. While people knew of more psychologists with substance abuse problems, impairment was perceived to result more frequently
from psychological problems. Respondents’ reported (in order of frequency)
overwork, personality disorders, emotional or mental illnesses, and health or
age effects, as other problem areas for colleagues.
In parallel to the students’ self-reported experiences with therapy, which
provides another perspective of incidence of psychological problems or impairment, a survey of 425 members of the Counseling Psychology division (Division 17) of the American Psychological Association was conducted on personal
experiences with depression and treatment (Gilroy, Carroll, & Murra, 2002).
Slightly more than half of this sample identified themselves as being employed
in private practice. More than half of the respondents identified themselves as
depressed. Of the 114 who recall receiving formal diagnoses during therapy, approximately one-third were diagnosed with dysthymia, one-third with adjustment disorder with depressed mood, and about 10% had a major depressive
disorder or bipolar disorder; almost half of the sample reported experiencing
some form of suicidal ideation or behavior (Gilroy et al., 2002). Although some
430 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
of the depressed participants perceived their depression as having a positive impact on their clinical work by increasing empathy and effectiveness, the majority thought their depression impacted their work negatively. Feeling depressed
led these counselors to have reduced energy, be less productive, feel distracted,
experience decreased patience and confidence, be less emotionally available,
and feel burned out (Gilroy et al., 2002). Of course, these findings may not be
generalizable due to limited sample sizes and the self-selection process inherent in survey studies.
How Does the Profession Handle Impaired or Burned-Out
Trainees and Professionals?
Even though professional deficiencies and impairment can be difficult to identify and ameliorate (Procidano et al., 1995), clinical training programs (graduate programs, predoctoral and postdoctoral internships) frequently need to
address these issues with students. The Ethics Code (APA, 2002) mandates selfidentification of diminished functioning and self-referral for assistance in recovering from such difficulties. Yet, many barriers prevent students and
professionals from seeking assistance from their training programs or colleagues for personal problems.
Students might fear losing their careers or being stigmatized by professors
and classmates if they admit to personal deficiencies or impairment. Professionals might also fear stigmatization or have difficulty identifying or admitting
their own need for help. Also, avoiding dual relationships can be challenging in
professionals’ search for a therapist or supervisor to help them remediate deficiencies or impairment. Practitioners in rural areas or those who are highly visible in professional organizations might encounter this difficulty most often.
For students, programs often limit the time for degree completion, and
leaves of absence or remediation work could delay meeting program milestones. Admitting deficiencies, therefore, if others have not identified them,
can present a dilemma for the student whose decision making might already be
impaired. Professionals may similarly have financial burdens that present obstacles to them taking a temporary break from providing client services to
allow time for self-care and remediation. Other reasons students or professionals might not seek help include self-doubt, unrealistic expectations for what
one should be able to handle, and what others expect of them. Training programs and personal philosophical orientations, practices, and social climates
might foster outreach, or might prohibit it.
As the literature review on personal therapy during training has revealed, in many situations self-identification and self-referral for personal
problems do not occur. Training programs have at least some responsibility for
aiding students in identifying problematic behaviors and impairment, and developing remediation plans. When remediation plans are unsuccessful, termination is often the only outcome.
Few studies or articles detail the types of remediation plan used for students (Forrest et al., 1999), and even fewer can be found for practicing professionals (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998). Training programs often recommend
personal therapy, repeat practicum, extra or repeated coursework, leave of absence, increased supervision, tutoring, growth groups, or students leaving their
Self-Care and Ethics 431
programs (Forrest et al., 1999). While personal therapy was the most common
remediation action taken in Forrest’s review, this intervention is somewhat
controversial among training program philosophies and directors, based on ethical guidelines. Recommending personal therapy is controversial because
trainees might be resistant to seeking treatment; the trainees’ privacy might be
compromised or they might perceive it to be so; mandating personal therapy
may be considered a boundary violation in the student-supervisee relationship;
therapists have conflicting roles in servicing the student and communicating
with the program about progress; program involvement may interfere with the
therapeutic relationship; and therapy does not guarantee remediation of
trainee deficiencies (Forrest et al., 1999).
Based on the limited literature, it is advisable for remediation plans to be
goal-focused and problem-solving oriented. The identified problems and the
proposed solutions or remediation plans should be obviously linked. Steps for
remediation should be detailed and behavioral so that progress and change can
be monitored and students and training supervisors have objective understandings of what is expected. Students and trainers would also benefit from
prospectively outlining consequences of successful and unsuccessful completion of these plans. While these recommendations make intuitive sense, little is
offered in the literature to document the frequency of clearly delineated policies, procedures, remediation plans, or outcomes.
The frequency of student dismissal is an outcome that has been empirically surveyed. According to a review of several studies, most programs reportedly have separated or dismissed at least one student within a 3-year time
period as a last resort for any of the following reasons: inadequate clinical
skills, deficient interpersonal skills, supervision difficulties, unprofessional demeanor, personality disorder, emotional problems, and academic dishonesty.
These statistics underscore the prevalence of such difficulties even at the training level. Much like the profession as a whole, much work is needed to improve
remediation procedures, documentation, and report of outcomes.
Practicing professionals, especially those in private practice, are often not
directly accountable to supervisors or administrators. They are responsible to
society, the profession, and the clients to maintain their own competence and
well-functioning. This presupposes a high degree of self-monitoring, and allows limited opportunity for identification of impairment by others beyond
their service recipients. Formal remediation programs for impaired psychologists are rare, although colleague assistance programs are increasingly available
on a state-by-state basis.
If not by self-referral and intrinsic motivation, then how do professionals
enter into remediation for impairment or personal problems? If not selfmotivated, professionals might be sanctioned by state licensing boards to engage in therapy, additional supervision, or suspension of providing services, if
found guilty of problematic, illegal, or unethical behavior. Other actions taken
by state boards, depending on the severity of misconduct or consequence to impaired or unethical behavior may include educative or warning letters, reprimanding letters, directives to take specific corrective action as dictated by the
regulatory board, or even revocation of licensure. Notice, however, that these
actions occur based on behaviors and evidence of impairment or misconduct,
rather than on the proactive approaches that are more easily taken in training
432 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
programs before damage occurs. Ideally, identification of professional impairment occurs by self or colleagues before consumers are affected.
The Ethics Code (APA, 2002) provides guidelines outlining the responsibility of professionals to confront colleagues directly before pursuing official
means of intervention for impairment. Standard 1.04 “Informal Resolution of
Ethical Violations” states:
When psychologists believe that there may have been an ethical violation by another psychologist, they attempt to resolve the issue by bringing it to the attention
of that individual, if an informal resolution appears appropriate and the intervention does not violate any confidentiality rights that may be involved. (p. 1063)
If the preceding actions do not resolve the situation, Ethical Standard 1.05
(Reporting Ethical Violations) states “psychologists take further action appropriate to the situation. Such actions might include referral to state or national
committees on professional ethics, to state licensing boards, or to the appropriate institutional authorities” (p. 1063).
For recipients of services (clients, patients, students), the procedures are
probably less well known by the public, and actions are most likely pursued
through lawyers or the help of other psychologists. Such actions are probably
less likely to occur due to the individuals’ own personal problems that sent
them to a psychologist in the first place! There are few formalized ways to address problematic behaviors in practicing professionals before the behaviors become evidence of impairment.
The legal and ethical mechanisms described are in place to protect the
public from unlawful, incompetent, and unethical actions by psychologists
(Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998). The relationship between law and ethics is
complex, but neither tolerates impaired functioning. Unlike privacy afforded in
graduate training programs that protects students from having other students
know about their personal situations, actions taken by legal and ethical bodies
in the profession of psychology are often public and published. Thus, selfregulation is critical to self-preservation, as are support and encouragement for
and of others. Self-regulation and support are the best forms of prevention.
Awareness of due process procedures and policies outlined by the APA in their
Ethics Code (2002), and in state licensing guidelines is also important. These
documents inform professionals and consumers about the consequences for
professionals engaging in misconduct or whose impairment is negatively impacting clients. This information, much like that for trainees, can motivate or
inhibit colleagues and consumers from reporting impaired psychologists.
Therapists’ Reactions to Clients: Normal to Problematic and
What to Do about It
In your past week, what emotions have you experienced? Have you been excited? Elated? Anxious? Nervous? Compassionate? Empathic? Fearful? Con-
Self-Care and Ethics 433
cerned? Worried? Angry? Aggressive? Responsible? Embarrassed? Competitive?
Avoidant? Aggravated? Frustrated? Relaxed? Talkative? Overwhelmed with love
or attraction for someone? Have you had intrusive thoughts of self-assured success or defeat? Jealous thoughts? Fantasies about what life would be like if ...?
All these are commonly experienced emotions, feelings, and thoughts. Yet, are
they positive or negative? Appropriate or not? The answer depends largely on the
frequency, intensity, and circumstances in which they are experienced, and the
resultant behavior.
It is appropriate to feel somewhat anxious about a job interview or traveling to a new place, but if that anxiety prevents you from presenting yourself as
well as you might have otherwise, or if it interferes with your ability to arrive
at the destination of choice, the anxiety might be considered excessive or problematic. The behaviors that result might be displays of insecurity or negatively
affected communication or physiological functioning, for example, loss of
train-of-thought, stuttering, distraction, avoidance, sweatiness, or heart palpitations. For others, the intensity of anxiety in these situations might be uncomfortable, but their coping strategies might prevent their anxiety from negatively
affecting their behaviors or outward appearance. These individuals may continue to function without consequence.
Thus, in discussing therapists’ reactions to clients, it is important to recognize that like any other person, therapists will experience a wide range of emotions in response to their clients’ stories, symptoms, appearance, personalities,
therapy behaviors (compliance, participation, honesty), and other variables.
This is normal and expected. The key, however, is being self-aware of the
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors one has in relation to each client, and populations as a whole so that self-monitoring occurs; supervision or assistance can be
sought, if needed; and appropriate therapist-client relations and boundaries are
maintained. Sounds easy and obvious, right? The following illustrations are actual situations that have occurred for trainees or professionals in the field, with
identifying information disguised for protection. Consider how you might
think, feel, and act if you were in the position of the trainee or therapist.
Clinical Example: Mina and Her “Rescue”
Mina is a third-year doctoral student in
clinical psychology. She has succeeded
in school through undergraduate training, but always felt pressured to achieve
a doctoral degree due to her parents’
academic achievements. In her doctoral
training, Mina struggled with certain
aspects of the curriculum, and with
balancing school, personal life, and her
part-time job. She had several meetings
with faculty to address her disorganization, lack of follow-through, and academic difficulty that put her in jeopardy of not progressing in the program.
She experienced feelings of depression
and intermittent anxiety.
In her practicum, she assessed a
20-year-old female, Rachel who had a
similar background. Rachel had failed
conversational Italian and was seeking
an evaluation of a possible learning disability to validate her appeal to the college to expunge her grade because it
resulted from a self-reported language
(continued)
434 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
Clinical Example: Mina and Her “Rescue” (Continued)
disability. After extensive history taking
and testing, Mina concluded that while
the tests did not actually confirm a language disability, they did not entirely
disconfirm this claim either. Also, Rachel
appeared to have some organizational
difficulties and stressors that might
ave interfered with her successful performance. Considering Rachel’s family
pressure to graduate with honors, and
the unlikely chance that this would result if the grade remained, Mina felt inordinate pressure to produce results
consistent with Rachel’s pleas for help.
Mina felt badly for Rachel and the feelings she expressed about her parents’
reactions. Since the data was unclear,
Rachel felt conflicted and inclined to
highlight (possibly embellish) the difficulties Rachel experienced with recommendations to give her a waiver exam
and accommodations for a reexamination that would dismiss her previous
grade. After all, testing was imperfect
and therefore, how could she say for certain that Rachel’s self-assessment wasn’t
accurate?
Points to Ponder: What would be appropriate steps for Mina to take on concluding her evaluation? How could she identify
the potential for her emotions to dictate her
professional judgment and behavior?
Clinical Example: Lola and the Hug
Lola was a third-year doctoral student
who had little clinical experience prior
to beginning her graduate studies. Her
previous career was as a resource room
teacher in an elementary school. During Lola’s practicum training year in a
community mental health setting, she
had few returning clients and little success with the few ongoing cases she
had. She was overwhelmed by her
sense of responsibility for her clients’
well-being, and her need to recall didactic information to apply it in clinical
situations. She often felt stressed and
exhausted by these perceived demands,
until she was assigned to work with
a 10-year-old boy, Brad, who was having behavioral problems at home. The
child’s mother had four other younger
children and was often stressed and upset about Brad’s poor behavior, which
often led her to frustration and angry
outbursts instead of the scheduled behavioral plan she was to follow. After
the fourth session, Brad’s mother reported success with the behavior plan
during their vacation week. Lola was so
pleased by the mother’s report that she
jumped up in session, hugged her and
overzealously expressed her joy. For
the first time in this placement, Lola
felt like she had succeeded in her therapeutic efforts and that she was competent to practice what she had been
learning. In contrast, Brad’s mother
was too stunned to respond to her hug,
did not hug her back, and canceled
their next session.
Points to Ponder: What were some of
the possible antecedents that led to Lola’s
hug? Consider her thoughts, feelings, beliefs,
and behavior; consider those of the mother.
Whose needs were served by Lola’s hugging
the client? What are some other possible
ways that Lola could have expressed her satisfaction to Brad’s mother? What cues could
have helped Lola identify her vulnerability
to acting inappropriately with this client?
Self-Care and Ethics 435
Clinical Example: Andy and the Never-Ending
Client Commitment
Andy had worked as a clinical psychologist for 10 years. His income was generated from private practice, adjunct
teaching, consultation, and executive
job coaching. In the summertime, Andy
was referred a new client from a
previous client. Joanie, a 42-year-old
administrative assistant, had a longstanding history of severe depression
that she attributed to genetics (maternal side) and to being raised by an uncaring, demeaning, alcohol-abusing
mother and mostly silent father. Andy
identified early in the assessment process that Joanie lacked specific adaptive
coping skills and had maladaptive and
dysfunctional thoughts and belief patterns, for which he outlined a specific
cognitive behavioral approach to treatment. Joanie, however, seemed more
interested in venting and whining
about her problems each session, was
help-rejecting of suggestions made by
Andy, and was noncompliant with
homework. Andy monitored Joanie’s
depression and anxiety with standardized self-report questionnaires, and
found that she had not improved at all
in four sessions. Joanie committed only
to biweekly sessions, and canceled her
appointments fairly often. Andy often
found himself either bored during her
sessions, in which he would find his
mind wandering during her complaint
monologues, or he found himself angry
and irritated by her unwillingness to
make efforts to change her situation.
She argued that others were the cause
of her problems, or that she simply did
not have time to do Andy’s homework
between sessions even if she did think
they would be helpful. Quickly, he
became less active in the sessions and
discontinued assigning homework or
practice exercises. Joanie claimed that
she felt better after her sessions, despite
her lack of improvement according to
the outcome measures or her display of
affect. Andy’s client census was low,
and despite his frustration with her,
and his wish prior to sessions that she
would not actually present for therapy,
he continued to allow her to be enrolled as a client and scheduled regular
sessions with her.
Points to Ponder: Andy expresses feelings of frustration, anger, and boredom
with Joanie. How do these feelings possibly
affect his practice of therapy with her?
What are the potential consequences to her
as a client? What are some of the other motivating factors for Andy to continue to
work with Joanie? What are some of the behaviors Andy exhibits that might be apparent to Joanie or that he needs to recognize as
signs that he is not functioning optimally?
Clinical Example: Mitchell and the Therapeutic Gift
Mitchell, aged 48, had been a private
practicing clinical psychologist for 20
years. Single and never married, he
maintained a home office in a somewhat rural area. He had a part-time
secretary who mostly took messages
(continued)
Promoting Self-Awareness
Can you imagine yourself in any of the preceding situations? Depending on the
amount of experience you have had as a therapist, the answer to the question
is sure to vary. Whereas these scenarios each differ, there are common themes
among them. These themes can be tied back to some of the core principles of
cognitive-behavioral theory and practice.
436 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
Clinical Example: Mitchell and the Therapeutic Gift (Continued)
and processed billing for him. Among
his various clients, Mitchell began seeing a 36-year-old mother, Anna, who
had three children (ages 4, 6, and 9)
and whose husband of 11 years had just
announced that he was leaving her for
someone else. Mitchell described this
woman as competent, educated, resilient, and very attractive. She was reportedly a dedicated mother, wife, and
respected colleague in her part-time
position as a project manager for a
pharmaceutical company. Her goal for
therapy was to focus her efforts on constructing her future life around her
children’s well-being, financial security,
and eventual comfort of a new romantic relationship.
Mitchell was intrigued by Anna’s rationality, pragmatism, and goal-oriented
approach to life. He found himself
thinking about her between sessions
when he drove by basketball courts that
reminded him of stories she told about
her children’s love of sports. He appreciatively noticed women who wore
glasses and accessories similar to Anna’s
distinct style. On one occasion, he purchased a three-dollar key ring that had a
clever saying on it that he thought captured what could be Anna’s motto for
life, “Don’t wait for chance—Create happiness around you!” He rationalized to
himself that the key chain would be a
therapeutic reminder for her to maintain
her positive attitude. He found himself
self-disclosing his own coping practices
and mantras that helped him through
specific difficult times in the past, which
he detailed for her.
As time progressed, Mitchell’s availability for sessions with Anna seemed to
push later and later into the evening,
and beyond the hours when his secretary was present. He allowed a 30-
minute break prior to her session that
allowed him to “rejuvenate,” by showering and freshening up. Often, she held
the last session of the evening, and her
time allotment extended beyond the
standard 60 minutes as she talked and
talked about her problems, efforts, solutions, and goals. Anna was grateful for
the support and help. She was focused
exclusively on her own challenging situation of managing three children, an
emotional divorce, increasing work responsibilities, and reestablishing her independence, and therefore, didn’t think
twice about the change in her session
time. She assumed he gave all of his
clients this extra attention.
Points to Ponder: Mitchell had been in
private practice for 20 years and therefore,
had much experience in the practice of therapy with no reported history of inappropriate or unethical behavior. How could
Mitchell have identified his stray from appropriate professional practice? What reactions to Anna did he have that should have
been signs for him to monitor his behavior
more closely? If Mitchell avoided or denied
his emotions or feelings toward Anna, what
behaviors might he have recognized as potentially problematic?
First, therapists need to use their own feelings as cues to potential problematic situations. This is a key concept for self-awareness and professional
problem solving.
Second, the link between thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and actions is clear
both for the individual therapist, the individual client, and the interactions between them. The concept of Bandura’s (1977) reciprocal determinism (the idea
that a person affects his or her environment, which in turn, affects the person’s
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors) is illustrated in these examples. Because of
the power differential of the therapeutic relationship, the therapist is responsible for being the authority and operating in a competent, nonboundary violating, professional manner.
Third, considering the earlier discussion of how personal problems, psychological distress or impairment, or burnout can impact therapists’ judgment, personal and clinical decision making, self-awareness of stressors and their impact
must be attended to at all times, so that global difficulties will be less likely to
cause inappropriate behavior at an individual client level. Fourth, therapists must
be aware of their ethical and legal obligations to their clients, the community, and
the profession. If self-monitoring reveals that there is potential for ethical or illegal
misconduct, therapists or students-in-training must be aware of their avenues for
prevention of such behavior. These include consultation, supervision, self-care,
and appropriate management of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that will allow
for best-practice behaviors toward clients, or appropriate termination and referral
of clients if this cannot be achieved. Mitchell could have recognized his boundary
slide when he was spending more and more time thinking about his client. He
could have taken steps to address these thoughts by seeking consultation, beginning his own therapy, or self-monitoring his behaviors more consciously.
Overall, a problem-solving approach to self-awareness and clinical decision-making (Felgoise et al., 2002; A. M. Nezu & Nezu, 1989; A. M. Nezu et al.,
1997) is advocated in monitoring thoughts, feelings, and actions related to professional practice and client care. Recognizing feelings as cues (such as Andy’s
feelings for his client), challenging your own thoughts and beliefs, and identifying behaviors that are adaptive or maladaptive in clinical situations and relationships are imperative (e.g., delaying termination or holding longer sessions).
Identifying potential problems, goals, and relevant obstacles to those problems
will be important for prevention and intervention, should it get to that point.
Generating alternative solutions for handling potentially problematic situations, and making rational and systematic decisions about how to handle the
situations based on the generated solutions is critical. Perhaps most importantly, implementing the solutions and monitoring the consequences of your
behaviors, decisions, and solutions will be critical to the overall outcome of
your professional conduct in the specific situations addressed. If the outcomes
are unsatisfactory, or the alternatives are unlikely to reach the goals, troubleshooting and seeking professional help are part of all therapists’ professional
responsibility, as described earlier.
Self-Assessment of Burnout, Distress, and Daily Hassles
Given the popularity of burnout, distress, and daily hassles as topics in the public domain, self-assessments of these constructs are widely available. A simple
Self-Care and Ethics 437
Internet search will yield many publicly available self-assessment tests that are
free of charge and self-scoring. Alternatively, the checklists and questionnaires
you learn about in your studies of clinical psychology are appropriate for selfassessment as well. The following three web sites can help you start this selfevaluation:
1. www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTCS_08.htm. This link provides a
burnout self-test and articles on related topics, such as stress management. Unless otherwise stated, James Manktelow authored many of the
articles listed (August, 2003).
2. www.healthyplace.com/site/tests/psychological.asp. This link offers many
psychological self-tests for education and screening.
3. Stamm, B. H., & Figley, C. R. (1996). Compassion Satisfaction and Fatigue
Test. Available on the World Wide Web: www.isu.edu/∼bhstamm
/tests.htm.
Identifying and Confronting Inappropriate or Problematic
Behaviors in Peer-Trainees or Colleagues
If we have established that identifying potentially problematic reactions to
clients is important, yet preventing misconduct or inappropriate behavior can
sometimes be difficult for professionals, how does this compare with doing the
same for our colleagues or peers in the profession? If the preceding examples
presented clearly identifiable targets for change or intervention, then shouldn’t
it be that easy to identify the problems in our colleagues or peers? We would
argue, yes . . . and no. Yes, if information is provided in the same forthright
manner, it should be easy to identify problematic situations for professionals
who are knowledgeable and aware. However, the answer is often no because
information is seldom so easily obtainable from trainees, either because supervisees are fearful of sharing information that could affect their evaluations, or
lack of self-awareness prevents sharing pertinent information that would allow
others to identify problematic situations. Audio- or videotapes for review
would help, but trainees still would need to share the thoughts and feelings that
guided the behaviors in question, and that is not always easy for students to do.
Many professionals practice therapy independently and do not take advantage
of or seek peer supervision, consultation, or client feedback. There would be
few forums for other professionals to gain access to scenarios like the ones previously described unless therapists sought help in these situations. It is possible,
however, that therapists could learn of the problematic behaviors through the
clients themselves, should they seek out other therapy or assistance relating to
such matters.
Now, imagine that Mina, Lola, Andy, and Mitchell have inadvertently
shared the scenarios with you, either through consultation, casual conversation, or their supervision of you! However, they are unaware of the potential
problems that could arise. How would you give them this feedback? What are
some of the reasons that you might not give them this feedback, even if you
thought it is warranted?
438 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
Why might Mina’s, Lola’s, Andy’s, or Mitchell’s supervisors, supervisees,
or other peers or colleagues not confront them, despite the Ethics Code’s (APA,
2002) explicit principle that explains professionals’ responsibility to do so? Try
to recall if you have ever had to give feedback to friends or family members
about something they have said or done that was unacceptable or concerning to
you? What skills were necessary for you to do so?
Confronting problematic behavior is seldom if ever an easy task. Providers
of negative feedback must have acute communication skills, assertiveness
skills, confidence in their own appraisal of situations but reservation about the
limits of their perspective, and feelings of physical, emotional, and interpersonal safety to communicate such information. They must choose an appropriate context for offering feedback and approach the task with an attitude of tact
and respect. Also, the perceived risks cannot outweigh the potential benefit or
responsibility identified by the feedback provider. Supposing an individual had
all the necessary strengths and skills listed, there are still obstacles. Many of
these were reviewed earlier, which brings this chapter’s discussion almost to a
full circle: to the operational definitions of impairment and problematic behavior; few options for remediation or self-help specific to professional issues;
somewhat vague ethical guidelines and principles; and potentially severe consequences for trainees or professionals if behaviors are determined to be significant. The effort or emotional conflict or discomfort felt by the observer of the
inappropriate behavior may be consciously or unconsciously a deterrent for
getting involved in such situations. Principles of social psychology such as bystander apathy and diffusion of responsibility may also come into play. Readers
are encouraged to role-play or rehearse how they would address these issues
with their peers, colleagues, or supervisors, should the situations ever arise.
When Reactions to Clients Lead to Inappropriate or
Unethical Behavior
Unseasoned practitioners or trainees may think that it is unlikely they would
find themselves in situations such as those described, where their judgments
are clouded or their actions are faulty. Seasoned professionals might be able to
identify with some of these experiences, or recall their vulnerability. They realize that no-one is error-proof and belief in the idea of invulnerability increases
the risk of mistakes. In fact, anyone could put themselves at risk for engaging in
inappropriate or unethical behavior, when in unfavorable circumstances. When
self-care is poor, and burnout is high, it is likely that judgment, decision making, and boundaries are compromised. We challenge you to think about how
you behave, think, and feel when you are burned out, or are neglecting selfcare. Are your judgments clear? When you lack sleep, do you find yourself less
inhibited or attentive? Pulling together the concepts of self-care, burnout, and
risks for unethical behavior, we encourage you to think about how clinicians
find themselves in situations like the ones we have described.
Personal therapist characteristics are known to be risk factors for troubled
outcome. Koocher and Keith-Speigel (1998) published a book that we highly
recommend: Ethics in Psychology: Professional Standards and Cases (second edition).
In review of hundreds of case studies, ethics, law, decision making, standards
Self-Care and Ethics 439
and best practices, they illustrate the challenges professional psychologists (practitioners, scholars, educators, etc.) face in daily practice, and discuss ways to
prevent inappropriate, unethical, and illegal conduct.
Koocher and Keith-Speigel (1998) discuss several categories of risk factors
for inappropriate behavior or conduct either as a result of poor judgment, or as
a result of poor self-monitoring or coping with reactions to clients. The likelihood that therapists or students will engage in role blending, crossing professional boundaries, and maintaining conflicts of interest is often increased by
the behaviors and circumstances of “risky therapists,” “risky career periods,”
“risky work settings,” and “risky clients” (pp. 174–176). The research summarized by Koocher and Keith-Speigel is vast, but several highlights are important
to the purpose of this chapter on self-care and prevention of negative consequences from impairment, personal problems, and incompetence.
Risky therapists are described as those who demonstrate poor boundaries
(Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998) by actions that cross the expected limits for
professional behavior. Such therapists are prone to excessive, unnecessary, and
often inappropriate self-disclosure. Gift-giving and acceptance of gifts raise serious questions and concerns about clients’ well-being and best interests, and
whose needs (therapists’ or clients’) are being served. Therapists with poor
boundaries, inexperience, and poor judgment are most likely to engage in giftgiving or gift-accepting practices when they are not in the clients’ best interest,
or when the therapist does not even know to evaluate the consequences of such
actions.
Risky therapists may have personal problems themselves that lead them to
seek “adoration, power, or social connection” (Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998,
p. 174) through their professional work. Certain theoretical orientations might
also be likely to draw persons with these risky characteristics into training. Or
perhaps, practice within certain theoretical orientations is less well defined,
and therefore allows for boundary violations (Koocher & Keith-Speigel). Further exploration of clinical judgment and boundary management is offered by
Barnett (1998) or Zur (2007).
Risky career periods are explained by Koocher and Keith-Speigel (1998)
as potentially occurring at any time. Misconduct or inappropriate management
of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors toward clients is easily understandable,
though not acceptable, during early training, especially if supervision or rolemodeling was poor, or when students have had minimal experience handling
complicated reactions and issues. The midcareer time frame is considered risky
due to the increased likelihood that psychologists might experience more personal problems across the biopsychosocial domain during that time in their lifespan. Lastly, late-stage career professionals might be considered risky due to
the potential for distance from the standards of the practice, and inflated beliefs
about their own competence and judgment as a result of passage of time.
Risky work settings include those in which professionals are practicing
psychology in isolation from other psychologists or mental health professionals
(Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998). Home offices have also been considered a potential risk source or factor because of the automatic information known by the
client about the therapist, and the possibly intimate and personal nature of such
a setting (Koocher & Keith-Speigel). Nontraditional settings or those with multi440 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
disciplinary teams might also create less clear boundaries. Physicians and patients have different expectations of appropriate boundaries than do psychologists and patients or clients. Also, psychologists are more exposed to patients in
vulnerable states, such as various levels of undress, fear, or consciousness due to
medication or procedures conducted. Patients might attribute their survival or
ability to cope with such circumstances entirely to therapists’ participation in
their care, as differentiated from those who were poking and prodding them for
physical care.
Risky clients probably need less description than the other categories described. Clients who have poor boundaries, low self-esteem, neediness, high
dependency, or experiences of abuse, victimization, or abandonment in their
past or current circumstances might present opportunities for risky therapists
or naive therapists to engage in misconduct, knowingly or not. Risky clients
might look to the therapist as a replacement for lost persons in their lives, or for
them to serve in roles they have not been able to fill outside the professional relationship (Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998).
Preventing Psychologists’ Problems from Becoming
Professional Problems: Identifying the Warning Signs
Koocher and Keith-Speigel (1998) discuss the fact that therapists can be caring,
compassionate persons who experience a wide range of emotions in personal
situations and in reaction to clients, and still these same individuals are ethical
and professional in maintaining appropriate boundaries with consumers of
their services and expertise. They note that the literature suggests that individuals who engage in inappropriate, unethical, or impaired practice either due to
personal problems, incompetence, or other reasons, often lack insight about
their judgment and actions and rationalize their behaviors as actions intended
to be in the best interest of their clients (p. 197). Table 15.1 provides a list of
warning signs and signals of boundary crossings that may result from extreme
emotional, cognitive, or behavior reactions to clients. It is offered by Koocher
and Keith-Speigel (1998), and encompasses works described by Epstein and
Simon (1990, as cited by Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998, p. 198).
Crossing boundaries by engaging in sexual intimacies with clients is a significant problem that often seems so far out of the realm of possibility to students in training because the rationale for why this is not acceptable makes
sense. Estimates of the frequency of such conduct are hard to guess or obtain
due to the low report rate of such occurrences. However, even if estimates are
as low as recent reports suggest (0.9% for male therapists, 0.2% for female
therapists; Borys & Pope, 1989), psychologists are still violating the professional role by engaging in sexual intimacies with clients. Koocher and KeithSpeigel (1998) explain that many instances of sexual attraction will diminish
and do not result in inappropriate conduct. However, for some, these feelings
will escalate into unacceptable behavior. Table 15.2 describes 10 warning signs
of sexual attraction toward clients (Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998, p. 203).
The warning signs and signals provided by Koocher and Keith-Speigel
(1998) are helpful in differentiating potentially problematic thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors from those that are typical and expected in therapy. Self-reflection
Self-Care and Ethics 441
and self-awareness are critical aspects of the self-monitoring process as well. As
noted, therapists with personal problems and their own diagnosable mental
illness or difficulties should pay extra attention to their vulnerabilities and behaviors. Balancing one’s life between personal and professional roles and responsibilities and engaging in adaptive coping skills and stress management
should help therapists maintain healthy lifestyles and appropriate boundaries.
Therapists who ensure they have adequate social and emotional resources (professional or not), physical or stress outlets, opportunities for spiritual grounding
or exploration (if interested), and opportunities for meaningful interpersonal
and environmental experiences should have less need to seek comfort or personal affiliation through their clientele. For readers who identify themselves as
lacking in one or more areas mentioned, self-help resources are provided for addressing stress, emotional reactions, and personality characteristics that might
present challenges to working with others. Of course, persons need to identify
442 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
Table 15.1 Warning Signs and Signals of Boundary Crossings That
May Result from Extreme Emotional, Cognitive, or Behavior
Reactions to Clients
1. Actively seeking opportunities to be with a client outside the professional setting.
2. Anticipating with excitement, a certain client’s visitation.
3. Expecting that a client should volunteer to do favors for you (e.g., get you a better
deal from his business).
4. Viewing a client as in a position to advance your own position and fantasizing
how that would play out.
5. Wishing that a client were not a client and, instead, in some other type of relationship with you (e.g., your best friend or business partner).
6. Disclosing considerable detail about your own life to a client and expecting interest or nurturing in return.
7. Trying to influence a client’s hobbies, political views, or other personal choices
that have no direct therapeutic relevance.
8. Allowing a client to take undue advantage without confrontation (e.g., missing
many appointments).
9. Relying on a client’s presence or praise to boost your self-esteem.
10. Giving in to a client’s requests and perspectives on issues from fear that he or she
will otherwise leave therapy.
11. Feeling entitled to most of the credit if a client improves, especially if marked
achievement is attained while under your care.
12. Viewing clients as the central people in your life.
13. Greatly resisting terminating a client even though the indicators are clear.
14. Believing that you are the only person who can help a particular client.
15. Noticing that the pattern of interactions with a client is becoming increasingly
irrelevant to the therapeutic goals.
Offered by Koocher and Keith-Speigel (1998); encompassing works described by Epstein and
Simon (1990, as cited in Koocher & Keith-Speigel, 1998, p. 198).
when self-help materials are not sufficient and professional help should be
sought.
Self-Help References
Appendix A lists self-help materials that authors reviewing such materials recommend highly; we have used some of these works in therapy with our clients.
Norcross et al. (2000), provide thorough annotated bibliographies on over 15
mental health topics in the Authoritative Guide to Self-Help Resources in Mental
Health, developed on the basis of five national survey studies conducted on over
2,500 psychologists who are members of either the Clinical Psychology or
Counseling Psychology divisions of the American Psychological Association.
O’Halloran and Linton (2000) provide annotated references to self-care resources for counselors who experience stress on the job. While their focus is on
burnout and secondary traumatic stress from working with traumatized individuals, we selected references that seem to have broader application to psychologists working with a variety of persons.
The references appended to this chapter are by no means exhaustive,
given that self-help books are published in extremely high volume—estimated
at about 2,000 a year (G. M. Rosen, 1993). Readers are cautioned that self-help
may be independently beneficial when burnout and distress have not led to impaired functioning, or problems are still within grasp of self-management. Otherwise, professional help may be warranted, and these resources may be best
used as supplements. The discussion provided in this chapter and some of the
Self-Care and Ethics 443
Table 15.2 Warning Signs That a Clinician Is Sexually Attracted to
a Client
1. Thinking often about the client while not in session.
2. Having recurring sexual thoughts or fantasies about the client, in or out of session.
3. Dressing or grooming in an uncustomarily conscious fashion on the client’s
appointment day or looking forward to that client’s sessions above all others.
4. Attempting to elicit information from the client to satisfy personal curiosity, as
opposed to eliciting information that is required to achieve therapeutic goals.
5. Daydreaming about seeing the client socially as a “date.”
6. Becoming mildy flirtatious or eliciting discussions of sexual materials during therapy
when not therapeutically relevant.
7. Indulging in rescue fantasies or seeing yourself as the only person who can heal
this person.
8. Believing that you could make up for all the past deficits, sadness, or disappointments in the client’s life.
9. Becoming sexually aroused in the client’s presence.
10. Wanting to touch the client.
Source: Ethics in Psychology: Professional Standards and Cases, second edition (p. 203), by G. P. Koocher
and P. Keith-Spiegel, 1998, New York: Oxford University Press. Reprinted with permission.
self-assessment references will aid in self-reflection and self-evaluation to
make this determination, if relevant.
Positive Psychology
To this point, this chapter has mirrored the historical emphasis in the field of
clinical psychology, with the focus on problems, impairment, dysfunction,
and weaknesses and the alleviation of such. Clinical psychology has traditionally looked at psychological health as the absence of maladies or concerns, and
the goals of intervention have been to reduce negative traits, thoughts, feelings, behaviors, belief systems, and interpersonal and social relationships. Although many therapies also tout goals to increase positive thinking, feeling,
and behaving; adaptive belief systems; and interpersonal relationships, they
are usually secondary goals of the therapeutic process and seldom the reason
clients seek therapy. In fact, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) does not provide codes for positive change targets, nor do insurance companies pay for clinical psychologists to provide guidance in
increasing adaptive behaviors and competencies. In the past 10 years, however, there has been a major movement toward positive psychology as a science
examining happiness, well-being, human potential, and social strengths.
From the research focused on positive psychology, investigators aim to reconstruct the approach to maximizing individual potential and well-being by
focusing on building strengths and resiliency factors, rather than just minimizing disability and deficits. Clinical psychologists and other researchers
have begun to reexamine concepts such as burnout (Maslach et al., 2001)
from the vantage point of positive psychology research, and are learning more
about job engagement and positive approaches to alleviating negative syndromes such as those addressed earlier. The discussion that follows provides
only a cursory overview of key concepts in this field. Yet, the hope is that
readers will be inspired to learn more about this field and the topic areas as a
means for self-enhancement, self-care, and self-discovery.
Happiness and Subjective Well-Being
Happiness and subjective well-being refer to positive feelings and positive
states. Understanding these states is at the core of positive psychology (Seligman, 2002). There is some debate in the field as to whether happiness should
be defined by “the good life in terms of pleasure seeking and pain avoidance,”
also known as the hedonic tradition, or “the good life in terms of achieving one’s
full potential,” called the eudaimonic tradition (Carr, 2004, p. 41). Seligman
(2002) describes positive emotions as occurring in the past, present, and the future. Past positive emotions relating to happiness include “satisfaction, contentment, fulfillment, pride and serenity” (Carr, 2004, p. 2). Present happiness is
said to include momentary pleasures and more enduring gratifications (Carr,
2004). Future happiness is associated with positive emotions such as optimism,
hope, confidence, faith, and trust (Carr, 2004).
444 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
Pleasures, as described in Seligman’s (2002) view of positive emotions,
are derived through the senses and through positive experiences that result in
positive emotions. Gratifications are dependent on engagement in activities
that result in achieving flow through signature strengths (Carr, 2004). Flow and
signature strengths are key concepts to positive psychology.
Flow
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi coined the term flow, and defined it as “a particular
kind of experience that is so engrossing and enjoyable that it becomes . . . worth
doing for its own sake even though it may have no consequence outside itself.
Creative activities, music, sports, games, and religious rituals are typical sources
for this kind of experience” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999, p. 824). However, flow experiences can occur during studying, reading, dancing, writing, driving, or doing
anything that one intensely loves to do. Persons who are experiencing flow are
said to lose their sense of time, be completely engrossed in the activity generating this state, and experience a sense of ecstasy or excitement that can almost
seem too powerful or great . . . as if they are outside of themselves (Csikszentmihalyi, 1999). Flow is said to require skill, concentration, and perseverance,
and is thought to lead to subjective well-being. Csikszentmihalyi (1999) suggests that people are not necessarily experiencing happiness while they are in
flow experiences because they are not thinking about their feelings or emotions
at that time. Rather, the positive feelings such as happiness may be the result of
experiencing flow. Csikszentmihalyi (1999) states that “People are happy not
because of what they do, but because of how they do it” (p. 826).
The take-home message from this discussion of flow and happiness is that
trainees and psychologists need to find what makes them fully engaged and engrossed to the point that they have positive outlets and escapes, so to speak,
from their ordinary stressors and hassles. Activities, whether work-related
(writing or reading), personal, or social, that activate flow experiences and
stimulate cognitive, spiritual, or physical channels may be those that help balance oneself in a meaningful way that could buffer against burnout, psychological distress, and eventual impairment, and increase enjoyment from
participation in everyday work and personal experiences.
Strengths
In addition to engaging in flow, possessing human strengths such as courage,
future-mindedness, optimism, interpersonal skill, faith, work ethic, hope, honesty, perseverance, and self-determination, has been discovered to provide
buffers against mental illness and distress (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi,
2000). Examining human strengths is thought to help make people stronger
and more productive (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000), and also helps
them cope with life better. Examining individuals’ strengths is another key
focus of positive psychology, and is pertinent to the topic of self-care.
Signature strengths, are defined as strengths individuals have that are core
attributes of themselves; whose use are cause for excitement; that promote rapid
learning when used; that are desired to be used often with resulting feelings of
Self-Care and Ethics 445
positive emotions when they are used; and could be used in many situations
(Seligman, 2002). Signature strengths are determined by self-assessment according to the Values in Action Classification System (C. Peterson & Seligman,
2001), which examines 24 possible strengths. Based on a review of Seligman’s
work, Carr (2004) suggests that signature strengths are important in romantic
relationships, familial relationships, work settings, and leisure activities. Use of
signature strengths is thought to be related to the experience of flow. Trainees
and professionals may increase self-care and positive affectivity if they can identify their signature strengths, use them, and initiate experiences that will lead to
self-efficacy, happiness, and satisfaction.
Other Key Concepts in Positive Psychology
Other personal characteristics are frequently considered in examination of positive psychology and the study of human strengths. Such topics include quality
of life, expectations, the roles of emotional intelligence, giftedness, creativity
and wisdom, positive motives and traits, positive self (self-esteem, self-efficacy,
coping), and positive relationships (Carr, 2004). Although discussion of these
detailed topics is beyond the scope of this chapter, much can be learned from
delving into these topics. Yet, to remain focused on self-care, happiness, flow,
and signature strengths were chosen as focal points for discussion.
Happiness: Who Experiences It and How Can You Acquire
More of It?
A review of the empirical and theoretical literature suggests that positive affectivity, which results from positive experiences, pleasures, and gratifications, is “associated with greater job satisfaction and marital satisfaction and
may be enhanced through regular physical activity, adequate sleep, regular
socializing with close friends and striving for valued goals” (Carr, 2004,
pp. 39–40). These conclusions suggest that trainees and professionals seeking
a fuller and more positive personal and work life might benefit greatly from
learning about positive psychology research outcomes and predictors of happiness for the population-at-large, and professionals, specifically. Furthermore, studies reveal that persons reporting high degrees of happiness are
generally extraverted and optimistic, and have high self-esteem and internal
locus of control. Carr (2004) summarizes the recommendations and conclusions drawn from empirical studies (Argyle, 2001; Buss, 2000; Diener, Suh,
Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Lykken, 1999; Myers, 1992; Seligman, 2002) on happiness and positive emotions to suggest the following:
We can optimize our sense of well-being by taking some of the following courses of
action. With respect to relationships, mate with someone similar, communicate
kindly and clearly and forgive faults; maintain contact with extended family;
maintain a few close friendships; co-operate with acquaintances; and engage in religious or spiritual practices. With respect to the environment, secure physical and
financial safety and comfort for yourself and your family,... live in a geographically beautiful environment where there is fine weather and where there is pleas446 What Every Clinician Needs to Know
ing music and art. With respect to physical well-being, maintain good health and
engage in regular physical exercise. With respect to productivity, use skills that are
intrinsically pleasing for tasks that are challenging; achieve success and approval
at work that is interesting and challenging; and work toward a coherent set of
goals. With respect to leisure, eat quality food in moderation; regularly rest, relax
and take holidays in moderation; and engage in co-operative recreational activities
with groups of friends. (pp. 40–41)
Although Carr’s (2004) summary of the research findings and suggestions
seems general and unencumbered by barriers, the recommendations make sense.
Too often, we may overcomplicate our understanding of human behavior and the
approaches we take to optimizing our lives. As such, Carr’s synopsis is deemed
relevant and valuable to the discussion of self-care. We recommend that trainees
and professionals seek out the literature Carr draws on to explore areas that seem
most pertinent or that could be used for introspective focus. Carr also reviews
suggestions and advice to decrease negative affectivity, negative feelings, and dysfunctional thoughts, schemas, and beliefs. However, since much of clinical psychology focuses on these goals and approaches, they are not reiterated here.
A small survey of program and clinical training directors on the National
Council of Schools and Programs of Professional Psychology listserve, conducted for this chapter on self-care, showed that many psychologists in leadership roles in Clinical PsyD programs are practicing what Carr suggests. Box
15.1 summarizes the responses. This is great news because if graduate training
and program directors model good self-care behavior, the hope is that students
will practice good self-care behavior as well.
Self-Care and Ethics 447
Box 15.1
Responses by program and training directors, in order of frequency, to survey
question, “What practices do you in engage in for self-care or care-for your colleagues?”
1. Exercise/physical fitness alone or in interactive sports
2. Connections to friends and family, those who make you laugh, stay close to
good people
3. Cultural events—music, movies, concerts, plays, things that are thought provoking and emotionally satisfying
4. Hobbies—pleasure reading
5. Maintaining a religious connection, regular worship
6. Meditation, mindfulness, taking breaks
7. Clear boundaries on work (no nights/weekends), and balance at work; seeking supervision for different cases
8. Getting adequate sleep
9. Maintaining a good diet
10. Engaging in personal psychotherapy
Self-Assessment of Happiness, Strengths, Well-Being, Quality
of Life and Emotions
Numerous scales are available to measure happiness, strengths, and psychological and subjective well-being, quality of life, and emotions. Carr (2004) provides useful reference lists of measures available for research and self-testing
on all these variables. Among those that measure happiness are the following:
“The Satisfaction with Life Scale” (Diener, Emmons, Larsen, & Griffin, 1985),
“The Extended Satisfaction with Life Scale,” (Alfonso, Allinson, Rader, & Gorman, 1996), and “The Depression-Happiness Scale” (Joseph & Lewis, 1998).
The “Values in Action Inventory of Strengths” is a popular measure used to
evaluate signature strengths as defined by Seligman and his colleagues (C. Peterson & Seligman, 2001), which also can be accessed through a public website
(www.positivepsychology.org/viastrengthsinventory.htm).
Self-Help and Self-Exploration References on
Positive Psychology
Appendix B provides additional resources to aid trainees and professionals in
maximizing their positive well-being and minimizing possible precursors to distress, burnout, and impairment. The reference lists provided focus on positive
psychology topics and are gleaned from the same resources as the previous lists.
Summary
Throughout this chapter, numerous suggestions have been made to increase
psychologists’-in-training and professionals’ awareness of burnout, impairment, personal reactions to clients, and professional and ethical issues relating
to these topics. Trainees and professionals need to be mindful of setting clear
boundaries with clients and other professionals. Maintaining career vitality and
good self-care practices ought to also help minimize the likelihood of burning
out. Social support and good mentorship and supervision serve as buffers to
prevent personal problems from developing into professional problems and
risky behaviors. Suggestions have been made as to how trainees and professionals can be more self-aware and self-reflective of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that might be cause for concern when responsible for others’ well-being, or
for their own well-being.
Cognitive and behavioral strategies that have been discussed throughout
this book are revisited in discussion of self-care. Self-monitoring through journaling, self-talk, and reflection of how one’s behaviors impact others in personal and professional domains is advisable. Seeking peer consultation or
professional supervision is critical to ongoing growth and development of professional skills, and prevention of boundary violations, ethical infractions, or
misconduct. Supervision or consultation can and should be instrumental in reviewing thoughts, feelings, behaviors, and biases that could be working in favor
of or against the care of clients. Use of video- or audiotapes, role-plays, on-site


observation, and review of case materials can augment actual caseload discussion, and should be used when possible. Learning clinical decision making, and
problem-solving skills as applied to personal and professional competence is
strongly advised.
There are ways to gain mentoring and supervision outside one’s own training program. Students and professionals can benefit greatly from observing professionals in practice and listening to clinical and ethical decision making by
seasoned and responsible professionals they encounter in the field, at workshops
or presentations or through readings. Maintaining affiliation with peer and advanced trainees and professionals through listserves and professional organizations offers means to discuss, problem-solve, and explore issues that are less
likely to be found in textbooks or didactic exercises. Topics addressed in these forums might include how one manages personal stress and life demands, emotional reactions to clients, and grey areas of professional practice.
Trainees’ and professionals’ use of personal psychotherapy for growth, development, or intervention was also discussed in this chapter. For those who do
not undertake therapy, but want to address personal matters less formally, a
sampling of self-help assessments and intervention resources has been provided. This abbreviated list offers direction for those who have recognized the
need for pursuit of self-care in response to reading this chapter, or as a handy
guide for future reference. Many of the strategies and techniques discussed
throughout this chapter have also been applied and defined in reference to caring for colleagues, addressing colleagues with perceived personal or professional difficulties, and attending to impairment and incompetence in the field,
both in training and in the public professional domain. Lastly, the movement of
positive psychology was introduced and key concepts highlighted to encourage
developing professionals to initiate flow experiences, enhance their signature
strengths, and maximize the positive aspects of their personal styles.
Trainees and professionals need to maintain a sense of balance in their
lives that allows for healthy self-care and attention, and development of meaningful relationships and personal experiences that enhance positive feelings,
develop a strong sense of personal and professional self, and keep themselves in
tune to how external situations are impacting their behaviors, thoughts, and
feelings, and vice versa:


In the following pages I shall demonstrate that there is a psychological technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams, and that on the
application of this technique every dream will reveal itself as a psychological structure, full of significance, and one which may be assigned to a
specific place in the psychic activities of the waking state. Further, I shall endeavour to elucidate the processes which underlie the strangeness and
obscurity of dreams, and to deduce from these processes the nature of the psychic forces whose conflict or cooperation is responsible for our
dreams. This done, my investigation will terminate, as it will have reached the point where the problem of the dream merges into more
comprehensive problems, and to solve these we must have recourse to material of a different kind.
I shall begin by giving a short account of the views of earlier writers on this subject, and of the status of the dream-problem in contemporary
science; since in the course of this treatise I shall not often have occasion to refer to either. In spite of thousands of years of endeavour, little
progress has been made in the scientific understanding of dreams. This fact has been so universally acknowledged by previous writers on the
subject that it seems hardly necessary to quote individual opinions. The reader will find, in the works listed at the end of this work, many
stimulating observations, and plenty of interesting material relating to our subject, but little or nothing that concerns the true nature of the dream,
or that solves definitely any of its enigmas. The educated layman, of course, knows even less of the matter.
The conception of the dream that was held in prehistoric ages by primitive peoples, and the influence which it may have exerted on the formation
of their conceptions of the universe, and of the soul, is a theme of such great interest that it is only with reluctance that I refrain from dealing with
it in these pages. I will refer the reader to the well-known works of Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury), Herbert Spencer, E. B. Tylor, and other
writers; I will only add that we shall not realize the importance of these problems and speculations until we have completed the task of dreaminterpretation that lies before us.
A reminiscence of the concept of the dream that was held in primitive times seems to underlie the evaluation of the dream which was current
among the peoples of classical antiquity. They took it for granted that dreams were related to the world of the supernatural beings in whom
they believed, and that they brought inspirations from the gods and demons. Moreover, it appeared to them that dreams must serve a special
purpose in respect of the dreamer; that, as a rule, they predicted the future. The extraordinary variations in the content of dreams, and in the
impressions which they produced on the dreamer, made it, of course, very difficult to formulate a coherent conception of them, and necessitated
manifold differentiations and group-formations, according to their value and reliability. The valuation of dreams by the individual philosophers of
antiquity naturally depended on the importance which they were prepared to attribute to manticism in general.
In the two works of Aristotle in which there is mention of dreams, they are already regarded as constituting a problem of psychology. We are told 
that the dream is not god-sent, that it is not of divine but of demonic origin. For nature is really demonic, not divine; that is to say, the dream is
not a supernatural revelation, but is subject to the laws of the human spirit, which has, of course, a kinship with the divine. The dream is defined
as the psychic activity of the sleeper, inasmuch as he is asleep. Aristotle was acquainted with some of the characteristics of the dream-life; for
example, he knew that a dream converts the slight sensations perceived in sleep into intense sensations ("one imagines that one is walking
through fire, and feels hot, if this or that part of the body becomes only quite slightly warm"), which led him to conclude that dreams might easily
betray to the physician the first indications of an incipient physical change which escaped observation during the day.
As has been said, those writers of antiquity who preceded Aristotle did not regard the dream as a product of the dreaming psyche, but as an
inspiration of divine origin, and in ancient times the two opposing tendencies which we shall find throughout the ages in respect of the evaluation
of the dream-life were already perceptible. The ancients distinguished between the true and valuable dreams which were sent to the dreamer as
warnings, or to foretell future events, and the vain, fraudulent, and empty dreams whose object was to misguide him or lead him to destruction.
Gruppe speaks of such a classification of dreams, citing Macrobius and Artemidorus: "Dreams were divided into two classes; the first class
was believed to be influenced only by the present (or the past), and was unimportant in respect of the future; it included the enuknia (insomnia),
which directly reproduce a given idea or its opposite; e.g., hunger or its satiation; and the phantasmata, which elaborate the given idea
phantastically, as e.g. the nightmare, ephialtes. The second class of dreams, on the other hand, was determinative of the future. To this belonged:
1. Direct prophecies received in the dream (chrematismos, oraculum);
2. the foretelling of a future event (orama, visio);
3. the symbolic dream, which requires interpretation (oneiros, somnium.)
This theory survived for many centuries."
Connected with these varying estimations of the dream was the problem of "dream-interpretation." Dreams in general were expected to yield
important solutions, but not every dream was immediately understood, and it was impossible to be sure that a certain incomprehensible dream did
not really foretell something of importance, so that an effort was made to replace the incomprehensible content of the dream by something that
should be at once comprehensible and significant. In later antiquity Artemidorus of Daldis was regarded as the greatest authority on dreaminterpretation. His comprehensive works must serve to compensate us for the lost works of a similar nature The pre-scientific conception of the
dream which obtained among the ancients was, of course, in perfect keeping with their general conception of the universe, which was accustomed
to project as an external reality that which possessed reality only in the life of the psyche. Further, it accounted for the main impression made
upon the waking life by the morning memory of the dream; for in this memory the dream, as compared with the rest of the psychic content, seems
to be something alien, coming, as it were, from another world. It would be an error to suppose that theory of the supernatural origin of dreams
lacks followers even in our own times; for quite apart from pietistic and mystical writers - who cling, as they are perfectly justified in doing, to
the remnants of the once predominant realm of the supernatural until these remnants have been swept away by scientific explanation - we not
infrequently find that quite intelligent persons, who in other respects are averse from anything of a romantic nature, go so far as to base their
religious belief in the existence and co-operation of superhuman spiritual powers on the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of dreams
(Haffner). The validity ascribed to the dream-life by certain schools of philosophy - for example, by the school of Schelling - is a distinct
reminiscence of the undisputed belief in the divinity of dreams which prevailed in antiquity; and for some thinkers the mantic or prophetic power
of dreams is still a subject of debate. This is due to the fact that the explanations attempted by psychology are too inadequate to cope with the
accumulated material, however strongly the scientific thinker may feel that such superstitious doctrines should be repudiated.
To write strongly the history of our scientific knowledge of the dream-problem is extremely difficult, because, valuable though this knowledge
may be in certain respects, no real progress in a definite direction is as yet discernible. No real foundation of verified results has hitherto been
established on which future investigators might continue to build. Every new author approaches the same problems afresh, and from the very
beginning. If I were to enumerate such authors in chronological order, giving a survey of the opinions which each has held concerning the
problems of the dream, I should be quite unable to draw a clear and complete picture of the present state of our knowledge on the subject. I have
therefore preferred to base my method of treatment on themes rather than on authors, and in attempting the solution of each problem of the dream
I shall cite the material found in the literature of the subject.
But as I have not succeeded in mastering the whole of this literature - for it is widely dispersed, and interwoven with the literature of other
subjects - I must ask my readers to rest content with my survey as it stands, provided that no fundamental fact or important point of view has been
overlooked.
Until recently most authors have been inclined to deal with the subjects of sleep and dreams in conjunction, and together with these they have
commonly dealt with analogous conditions of a psycho-pathological nature, and other dream-like phenomena, such as hallucinations, visions, etc.
In recent works, on the other hand, there has been a tendency to keep more closely to the theme, and to consider, as a special subject, the separate
problems of the dream-life. In this change I should like to perceive an expression of the growing conviction that enlightenment and agreement in 
such obscure matters may be attained only by a series of detailed investigations. Such a detailed investigation, and one of a special psychological
nature, is expounded in these pages. I have had little occasion to concern myself with the problem of sleep, as this is essentially a physiological
problem, although the changes in the functional determination of the psychic apparatus should be included in a description of the sleeping state.
The literature of sleep will therefore not be considered here.
A scientific interest in the phenomena of dreams as such leads us to propound the following problems, which to a certain extent, interdependent,
merge into one another.
A. The Relation of the Dream to the Waking State
The naive judgment of the dreamer on waking assumes that the dream - even if it does not come from another world - has at all events transported
the dreamer into another world. The old physiologist, Burdach, to whom we are indebted for a careful and discriminating description of the
phenomena of dreams, expressed this conviction in a frequently quoted passage (p. 474): "The waking life, with its trials and joys, its pleasures
and pains, is never repeated; on the contrary, the dream aims at relieving us of these. Even when our whole mind is filled with one subject, when
our hearts are rent by bitter grief, or when some task has been taxing our mental capacity to the utmost, the dream either gives us something
entirely alien, or it selects for its combinations only a few elements of reality; or it merely enters into the key of our mood, and symbolizes
reality." J. H. Fichte (I. 541) speaks in precisely the same sense of supplementary dreams, calling them one of the secret, self-healing benefits of
the psyche. L. Strumpell expresses himself to the same effect in his Natur und Entstehung der Traume, a study which is deservedly held in high
esteem. "He who dreams turns his back upon the world of waking consciousness" (p. 16); "In the dream the memory of the orderly content of
waking consciousness and its normal behaviour is almost entirely lost" (p. 17); "The almost complete and unencumbered isolation of the psyche
in the dream from the regular normal content and course of the waking state..." (p. 19).
Yet the overwhelming majority of writers on the subject have adopted the contrary view of the relation of the dream to waking life. Thus Haffner
(p. 19): "To begin with, the dream continues the waking life. Our dreams always connect themselves with such ideas as have shortly before been
present in our consciousness. Careful examination will nearly always detect a thread by which the dream has linked itself to the experiences of the
previous day." Weygandt (p. 6) flatly contradicts the statement of Burdach. "For it may often be observed, apparently indeed in the great majority
of dreams, that they lead us directly back into everyday life, instead of releasing us from it." Maury (p. 56) expresses the same idea in a concise
formula: "Nous revons de ce que nous avons vu, dit, desire, ou fait."[5] Jessen, in his Psychologie, published in 1855 (p. 530), is rather more
explicit: "The content of dreams is always more or less determined by the personality, the age, sex, station in life, education and habits, and by the
events and experiences of the whole past life of the individual."
The philosopher, I. G. E. Maas, adopts the most unequivocal attitude in respect of this question (Uber die Leidenschaften, 1805): "Experience
corroborates our assertion that we dream most frequently of those things toward which our warmest passions are directed. This shows us that our
passions must influence the generation of our dreams. The ambitious man dreams of the laurels which he has won (perhaps only in imagination),
or has still to win, while the lover occupies himself, in his dreams, with the object of his dearest hopes.... All the sensual desires and loathings
which slumber in the heart, if they are stimulated by any cause, may combine with other ideas and give rise to a dream; or these ideas may mingle
in an already existing dream."[6]
The ancients entertained the same idea concerning the dependence of the dream-content on life. I will quote Radestock (p. 139): "When Xerxes,
before his expedition against Greece, was dissuaded from his resolution by good counsel, but was again and again incited by dreams to undertake
it, one of the old, rational dream-interpreters of the Persians, Artabanus, told him, and very appropriately, that dream-images for the most part
contain that of which one has been thinking in the waking state."
In the didactic poem of Lucretius, On the Nature of Things (IV. 962), there occurs this passage:
"Et quo quisque fere studio devinctus adhaeret, aut quibus in rebus multum sumus ante morati atque in ea ratione fuit contenta magis mens, in
somnis eadem plerumque videmur obire; causidici causas agere et componere leges, induperatores pugnare ac proelia obire,"... etc., etc. [7] Cicero
(De Divinatione, II. LXVII) says, in a similar strain, as does also Maury many centuries later: "Maximeque 'reliquiae' rerum earum moventur in
animis et agitantur, de quibus vigilantes aut cogitavimus aut egimus."[8]
The contradiction between these two views concerning the relation between dream life and waking life seems indeed irresolvable. Here we may
usefully cite the opinion of F. W. Hildebrandt (1875), who held that on the whole the peculiarities of the dream can only be described as "a series
of contrasts which apparently amount to contradictions" (p. 8). "The first of these contrasts is formed by the strict isolation or seclusion of the
dream from true and actual life on the one hand, and on the other hand by the continuous encroachment of the one upon the other, and the
constant dependence of the one upon the other. The dream is something absolutely divorced from the reality experienced during the waking state;
one may call it an existence hermetically sealed up and insulated from real life by an unbridgeable chasm. It frees us from reality, blots out the
normal recollection of reality, and sets us in another world and a totally different life, which fundamentally has nothing in common with real
life...." Hildebrandt then asserts that in falling asleep our whole being, with its forms of existence, disappears "as through an invisible trapdoor."
In one's dream one is perhaps making a voyage to St. Helena in order to offer the imprisoned Napoleon an exquisite vintage of Moselle. One is 
most affably received by the ex-emperor, and one feels almost sorry when, on waking, the interesting illusion is destroyed. But let us now
compare the situation existing in the dream with the actual reality. The dreamer has never been a wine-merchant, and has no desire to become
one. He has never made a sea-voyage, and St. Helena is the last place in the world that he would choose as the destination of such a voyage. The
dreamer feels no sympathy for Napoleon, but on the contrary a strong patriotic aversion. And lastly, the dreamer was not yet among the living
when Napoleon died on the island of St. Helena; so that it was beyond the realms of possibility that he should have had any personal relations
with Napoleon. The dream-experience thus appears as something entirely foreign, interpolated between two mutually related and successive
periods of time.
"Nevertheless," continues Hildebrandt, "the apparent contrary is just as true and correct. I believe that side by side with this seclusion and
insulation there may still exist the most intimate interrelation. We may therefore justly say: Whatever the dream may offer us, it derives its
material from reality, and from the psychic life centered upon this reality. However extraordinary the dream may seem, it can never detach itself
from the real world, and its most sublime as well as its most ridiculous constructions must always borrow their elementary material either from
that which our eyes have beheld in the outer world, or from that which has already found a place somewhere in our waking thoughts; in other
words, it must be taken from that which we have already experienced, either objectively or subjectively."
B. The Material of Dreams - Memory in Dreams
That all the material composing the content of a dream is somehow derived from experience, that it is reproduced or remembered in the dream -
this at least may be accepted as an incontestable fact. Yet it would be wrong to assume that such a connection between the dream-content and
reality will be easily obvious from a comparison between the two. On the contrary, the connection must be carefully sought, and in quite a
number of cases it may for a long while elude discovery. The reason for this is to be found in a number of peculiarities evinced by the faculty of
memory in dreams; which peculiarities, though generally observed, have hitherto defied explanation. It will be worth our while to examine these
characteristics exhaustively.
To begin with, it happens that certain material appears in the dream-content which cannot be subsequently recognized, in the waking state, as
being part of one's knowledge and experience. One remembers clearly enough having dreamed of the thing in question, but one cannot recall the
actual experience or the time of its occurrence. The dreamer is therefore in the dark as to the source which the dream has tapped, and is even
tempted to believe in an independent productive activity on the part of the dream, until, often long afterwards, a fresh episode restores the
memory of that former experience, which had been given up for lost, and so reveals the source of the dream. One is therefore forced to admit that
in the dream something was known and remembered that cannot be remembered in the waking state.[9]
Delboeuf relates from his own experience an especially impressive example of this kind. He saw in his dream the courtyard of his house covered
with snow, and found there two little lizards, half-frozen and buried in the snow. Being a lover of animals he picked them up, warmed them, and
put them back into the hole in the wall which was reserved especially for them. He also gave them a few fronds of a little fern which was growing
on the wall, and of which he knew they were very fond. In the dream he knew the name of the plant; Asplenium ruta muralis. The dream
continued returning after a digression to the lizards, and to his astonishment Delboeuf saw two other little lizards falling upon what was left of the
ferns. On turning his eyes to the open fields he saw a fifth and a sixth lizard making for the hole in the wall, and finally the whole road was
covered by a procession of lizards, all wandering in the same direction.
In his waking state Delboeuf knew only a few Latin names of plants, and nothing of any Asplenium. To his great surprise he discovered that a
fern of this name did actually exist, and that the correct name was Asplenium ruta muraria, which the dream had slightly distorted. An accidental
coincidence was of course inconceivable; yet where he got his knowledge of the name Asplenium in the dream remained a mystery to him.
The dream occurred in 1862. Sixteen years later, while at the house of one of his friends, the philosopher noticed a small album containing dried
plants, such as are sold as souvenirs to visitors in many parts of Switzerland. A sudden recollection came to him: he opened the herbarium,
discovered therein the Asplenium of his dream, and recognized his own handwriting in the accompanying Latin name. The connection could now
be traced. In 1860, two years before the date of the lizard dream, one of his friend's sisters, while on her wedding-journey, had paid a visit to
Delboeuf. She had with her at the time this very album, which was intended for her brother, and Delboeuf had taken the trouble to write, at the
dictation of a botanist, the Latin name under each of the dried plants.
The same good fortune which gave this example its unusual value enabled Delboeuf to trace yet another portion of this dream to its forgotten
source. One day in 1877 he came upon an old volume of an illustrated periodical, in which he found the whole procession of lizards pictured, just
as he had dreamt of it in 1862. The volume bore the date 1861, and Delboeuf remembered that he had subscribed to the journal since its first
appearance.
That dreams have at their disposal recollections which are inaccessible to the waking state is such a remarkable and theoretically important fact
that I should like to draw attention to the point by recording yet other hypermnesic dreams. Maury relates that for some time the word Mussidan
used to occur to him during the day. He knew it to be the name of a French city, but that was all. One night he dreamed of a conversation with a
certain person, who told him that she came from Mussidan, and, in answer to his question as to where the city was, she replied: "Mussidan is the 
principal town of a district in the department of Dordogne." On waking, Maury gave no credence to the information received in his dream; but the
gazetteer showed it to be perfectly correct. In this case the superior knowledge of the dreamer was confirmed, but it was not possible to trace the
forgotten source of this knowledge.
Jessen (p. 55) refers to a very similar incident, the period of which is more remote. "Among others we may here mention the dream of the elder
Scaliger (Hennings, l.c., p. 300), who wrote a poem in praise of the famous men of Verona, and to whom a man named Brugnolus appeared in a
dream, complaining that he had been neglected. Though Scaliger could not remember that he had heard of the man, he wrote some verses in his
honour, and his son learned subsequently that a certain Brugnolus had at one time been famed in Verona as a critic."
A hypermnesic dream, especially remarkable for the fact that a memory not at first recalled was afterwards recognized in a dream which followed
the first, is narrated by the Marquis d'Hervey de St. Denis:[10] "I once dreamed of a young woman with fair golden hair, whom I saw chatting
with my sister as she showed her a piece of embroidery. In my dream she seemed familiar to me; I thought, indeed, that I had seen her repeatedly.
After waking, her face was still quite vividly before me, but I was absolutely unable to recognize it. I fell asleep again; the dream-picture repeated
itself. In this new dream I addressed the golden-haired lady and asked her whether I had not had the pleasure of meeting her somewhere. 'Of
course,' she replied; 'don't you remember the bathing-place at Pornic?' Thereupon I awoke, and I was then able to recall with certainty and in
detail the incidents with which this charming dream-face was connected."
The same author[11] recorded that a musician of his acquaintance once heard in a dream a melody which was absolutely new to him. Not until
many years later did he find it in an old collection of musical compositions, though still he could not remember ever having seen it before.
I believe that Myers has published a whole collection of such hypermnesic dreams in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, but
these, unfortunately, are inaccessible to me. I think everyone who occupies himself with dreams will recognize, as a very common phenomenon,
the fact that a dream will give proof of the knowledge and recollection of matters of which the dreamer, in his waking state, did not imagine
himself to be cognizant. In my analytic investigations of nervous patients, of which I shall speak later, I find that it happens many times every
week that I am able to convince them, from their dreams, that they are perfectly well acquainted with quotations, obscene expressions, etc., and
make use of them in their dreams, although they have forgotten them in their waking state. I shall here cite an innocent example of dreamhypermnesia, because it was easy to trace the source of the knowledge which was accessible only in the dream.
A patient dreamed amongst other things (in a rather long dream) that he ordered a kontuszowka in a cafe, and after telling me this he asked me
what it could be, as he had never heard the name before. I was able to tell him that kontuszowka was a Polish liqueur, which he could not have
invented in his dream, as the name had long been familiar to me from the advertisements. At first the patient would not believe me, but some days
later, after he had allowed his dream of the cafe to become a reality, he noticed the name on a signboard at a street corner which for some months
he had been passing at least twice a day.
I have learned from my own dreams how largely the discovery of the origin of individual dream-elements may be dependent on chance. Thus, for
some years before I had thought of writing this book, I was haunted by the picture of a church tower of fairly simple construction, which I could
not remember ever having seen. I then suddenly recognized it, with absolute certainty, at a small station between Salzburg and Reichenhall. This
was in the late nineties, and the first time I had travelled over this route was in 1886. In later years, when I was already busily engaged in the
study of dreams, I was quite annoyed by the frequent recurrence of the dream-image of a certain peculiar locality. I saw, in definite orientation to
my own person - on my left - a dark space in which a number of grotesque sandstone figures stood out. A glimmering recollection, which I did
not quite believe, told me that it was the entrance to a beer-cellar; but I could explain neither the meaning nor the origin of this dream-picture. In
1907 I happened to go to Padua, which, to my regret, I had been unable to visit since 1895. My first visit to this beautiful university city had been
unsatisfactory. I had been unable to see Giotto's frescoes in the church of the Madonna dell' Arena: I set out for the church, but turned back on
being informed that it was closed for the day. On my second visit, twelve years later, I thought I would compensate myself for this
disappointment, and before doing anything else I set out for Madonna dell' Arena. In the street leading to it, on my left, probably at the spot where
I had turned back in 1895, I discovered the place, with its sandstone figures, which I had so often seen in my dream. It was, in fact, the entrance to
a restaurant garden.
One of the sources from which dreams draw material for reproduction - material of which some part is not recalled or utilized in our waking
thoughts - is to be found in childhood. Here I will cite only a few of the authors who have observed and emphasized this fact:
Hildebrandt (p. 23): "It has already been expressly admitted that a dream sometimes brings back to the mind, with a wonderful power of
reproduction, remote and even forgotten experiences from the earliest periods of one's life."
Strumpell (p. 40): "The subject becomes more interesting still when we remember how the dream sometimes drags out, as it were, from the
deepest and densest psychic deposits which later years have piled upon the earliest experiences of childhood, the pictures of certain persons,
places and things, quite intact, and in all their original freshness. This is confined not merely to such impressions as were vividly perceived at the
time of their occurrence, or were associated with intense psychological values, to recur later in the dream as actual reminiscences which give
pleasure to the waking mind. On the contrary, the depths of the dream-memory rather contain such images of persons, places, things and early 
experiences as either possessed but little consciousness and no psychic value whatsoever, or have long since lost both, and therefore appear
totally strange and unknown, both in the dream and in the waking state, until their early origin is revealed."
Volkelt (p. 119): "It is especially to be remarked how readily infantile and youthful reminiscences enter into our dreams. What we have long
ceased to think about, what has long since lost all importance for us, is constantly recalled by the dream."
The control which the dream exercises over material from our childhood, most of which, as is well known, falls into the lacunae of our conscious
memory, is responsible for the production of interesting hypermnesic dreams, of which I shall cite a few more examples.
Maury relates (p. 92) that as a child he often went from his native city, Meaux, to the neighbouring Trilport, where his father was superintending
the construction of a bridge. One night a dream transported him to Trilport and he was once more playing in the streets there. A man approached
him, wearing a sort of uniform. Maury asked him his name, and he introduced himself, saying that his name was C, and that he was a bridgeguard. On waking, Maury, who still doubted the actuality of the reminiscence, asked his old servant, who had been with him in his childhood,
whether she remembered a man of this name. "Of course," was the reply; "he used to be watchman on the bridge which your father was building
then."
Maury records another example, which demonstrates no less clearly the reliability of the reminiscences of childhood that emerge in our dreams.
M. F., who as a child had lived in Montbrison, decided, after an absence of twenty-five years, to visit his home and the old friends of his family.
The night before his departure he dreamt that he had reached his destination, and that near Montbrison he met a man whom he did not know by
sight, and who told him that he was M. F., a friend of his father's. The dreamer remembered that as a child he had known a gentleman of this
name, but on waking he could no longer recall his features. Several days later, having actually arrived at Montbrison, he found once more the
locality of his dream, which he had thought was unknown to him, and there he met a man whom he at once recognized as the M. F. of his dream,
with only this difference, that the real person was very much older than his dream-image.
Here I might relate one of my own dreams, in which the recalled impression takes the form of an association. In my dream I saw a man whom I
recognized, while dreaming, as the doctor of my native town. His face was not distinct, but his features were blended with those of one of my
schoolmasters, whom I still meet from time to time. What association there was between the two persons I could not discover on waking, but
upon questioning my mother concerning the doctor I learned that he was a one-eyed man. The schoolmaster, whose image in my dream obscured
that of the physician, had also only one eye. I had not seen the doctor for thirty-eight years, and as far as I know I had never thought of him in my
waking state, although a scar on my chin might have reminded me of his professional attentions.
As though to counterbalance the excessive part which is played in our dreams by the impressions of childhood, many authors assert that the
majority of dreams reveal elements drawn from our most recent experiences. Robert (p. 46) even declares that the normal dream generally
occupies itself only with the impressions of the last few days. We shall find, indeed, that the theory of the dream advanced by Robert absolutely
requires that our oldest impressions should be thrust into the background, and our most recent ones brought to the fore. However, the fact here
stated by Robert is correct; this I can confirm from my own investigations. Nelson, an American author, holds that the impressions received in a
dream most frequently date from the second day before the dream, or from the third day before it, as though the impressions of the day
immediately preceding the dream were not sufficiently weakened and remote.
Many authors who are unwilling to question the intimate connection between the dream-content and the waking state have been struck by the fact
that the impressions which have intensely occupied the waking mind appear in dreams only after they have been to some extent removed from the
mental activities of the day. Thus, as a rule, we do not dream of a beloved person who is dead while we are still overwhelmed with sorrow
(Delage). Yet Miss Hallam, one of the most recent observers, has collected examples which reveal the very opposite behaviour in this respect, and
upholds the claims of psychological individuality in this matter.
The third, most remarkable, and at the same time most incomprehensible, peculiarity of memory in dreams is shown in the selection of the
material reproduced; for here it is not, as in the waking state, only the most significant things that are held to be worth remembering, but also the
most indifferent and insignificant details. In this connection I will quote those authors who have expressed their surprise in the most emphatic
language.
Hildebrandt (p. 11): "For it is a remarkable fact that dreams do not, as a rule, take their elements from important and far-reaching events, or from
the intense and urgent interests of the preceding day, but from unimportant incidents, from the worthless odds and ends of recent experience or of
the remoter past. The most shocking death in our family, the impressions of which keep us awake long into the night, is obliterated from our
memories until the first moment of waking brings it back to us with distressing force. On the other hand, the wart on the forehead of a passing
stranger, to whom we did not give a moment's thought once he was out of sight, finds a place in our dreams."
Strumpell (p. 39) speaks of "cases in which the analysis of a dream brings to light elements which, although derived from the experiences of
yesterday or the day before yesterday, were yet so unimportant and worthless for the waking state that they were forgotten soon after they were
experienced. Some experiences may be the chance-heard remarks of other persons, or their superficially observed actions, or, fleeting perceptions 
of things or persons, or isolated phrases that we have read, etc."
Havelock Ellis (p. 727): "The profound emotions of waking life, the questions and problems on which we spend our chief voluntary mental
energy, are not those which usually present themselves at once to dream-consciousness. It is, so far as the immediate past is concerned, mostly the
trifling, the incidental, the 'forgotten' impressions of daily life which reappear in our dreams. The psychic activities that are awake most intensely
are those that sleep most profoundly."
It is precisely in connection with these characteristics of memory in dreams that Binz (p. 45) finds occasion to express dissatisfaction with the
explanations of dreams which he himself had favoured: "And the normal dream raises similar questions. Why do we not always dream of mental
impressions of the day before, instead of going back, without any perceptible reason, to the almost forgotten past, now lying far behind us? Why,
in a dream, does consciousness so often revive the impression of indifferent memory-pictures, while the cerebral cells that bear the most sensitive
records of experience remain for the most part inert and numb, unless an acute revival during the waking state has quite recently excited them?"
We can readily understand how the strange preference shown by the dream-memory for the indifferent and therefore disregarded details of daily
experience must commonly lead us altogether to overlook the dependence of dreams on the waking state, or must at least make it difficult for us
to prove this dependence in any individual case. Thus it happened that in the statistical treatment of her own and her friend's dream, Miss Whiton
Calkins found that 11 per cent of the entire number showed no relation to the waking state. Hildebrandt was certainly correct in his assertion that
all our dream-images could be genetically explained if we devoted enough time and material to the tracing of their origin. To be sure, he calls this
"a most tedious and thankless job. For most often it would lead us to ferret out all sorts of psychically worthless things from the remotest corners
of our storehouse of memories, and to bring to light all sorts of quite indifferent events of long ago from the oblivion which may have overtaken
them an hour after their occurrence." I must, however, express my regret that this discerning author refrained from following the path which at
first sight seemed so unpromising, for it would have led him directly to the central point of the explanation of dreams.
The behaviour of memory in dreams is surely most significant for any theory of memory whatsoever. It teaches us that "nothing which we have
once psychically possessed is ever entirely lost" (Scholz, p. 34); or as Delboeuf puts it, "que toute impression, meme la plus insignificante, laisse
une trace inalterable, indifiniment susceptible de reparaitre au jour";[12] a conclusion to which we are urged by so many other pathological
manifestations of mental life. Let us bear in mind this extraordinary capacity of the memory in dreams, in order the more keenly to realize the
contradiction which has to be put forward in certain dream-theories to be mentioned later, which seek to explain the absurdities and incoherences
of dreams by a partial forgetting of what we have known during the day.
It might even occur to one to reduce the phenomenon of dreaming to that of remembering, and to regard the dream as the manifestation of a
reproductive activity, unresting even at night, which is an end in itself. This would seem to be in agreement with statements such as those made
by Pilcz, according to which definite relations between the time of dreaming and the contents of a dream may be demonstrated, inasmuch as the
impressions reproduced by the dream in deep sleep belong to the remote past, while those reproduced towards morning are of recent origin. But
such a conception is rendered improbable from the outset by the manner in which the dream deals with the material to be remembered. Strumpell
rightly calls our attention to the fact that repetitions of experiences do not occur in dreams. It is true that a dream will make a beginning in that
direction, but the next link is wanting; it appears in a different form, or is replaced by something entirely novel. The dream gives us only
fragmentary reproductions; this is so far the rule that it permits of a theoretical generalization. Still, there are exceptions in which an episode is
repeated in a dream as completely as it can be reproduced by our waking memory. Delboeuf relates of one of his university colleagues that a
dream of his repeated, in all its details, a perilous drive in which he escaped accident as if by miracle. Miss Calkins mentions two dreams the
contents of which exactly reproduced an experience of the previous day, and in a later chapter I shall have occasion to give an example that came
to my knowledge of a childish experience which recurred unchanged in a dream.[13]
C. Dream-Stimuli and Sources
What is meant by dream-stimuli and dream-sources may be explained by a reference to the popular saying: "Dreams come from the stomach."
This notion covers a theory which conceives the dream as resulting from a disturbance of sleep. We should not have dreamed if some disturbing
element had not come into play during our sleep, and the dream is the reaction against this disturbance.
The discussion of the exciting causes of dreams occupies a great deal of space in the literature of dreams. It is obvious that this problem could
have made its appearance only after dreams had become an object of biological investigation. The ancients, who conceived of dreams as divine
inspirations, had no need to look for stimuli; for them a dream was due to the will of divine or demonic powers, and its content was the product of
their special knowledge and intention. Science, however, immediately raised the question whether the stimuli of dreams were single or multiple,
and this in turn led to the consideration whether the causal explanation of dreams belonged to the region of psychology or to that of physiology.
Most authors appear to assume that disturbance of sleep, and hence dreams, may arise from various causes, and that physical as well as mental
stimuli may play the part of dream-excitants. Opinions differ widely in preferring this or the other factor as the cause of dreams, and in classifying
them in the order of importance.
Whenever the sources of dreams are completely enumerated they fall into the following four categories, which have also been employed in the 
classification of dreams: (1) external (objective) sensory stimuli; (2) internal (subjective) sensory stimuli; (3) internal (organic) physical stimuli;
(4) Purely psychical sources of excitation.
1. External sensory stimuli
The younger Strumpell, the son of the philosopher, whose work on dreams has already more than once served us as a guide in considering the
problems of dreams, has, as is well known, recorded his observations of a patient afflicted with general anaesthesia of the skin and with paralysis
of several of the higher sensory organs. This man would laps into sleep whenever the few remaining sensory paths between himself and the outer
world were closed. When we wish to fall asleep we are accustomed to strive for a condition similar to that obtaining in Strumpell's experiment.
We close the most important sensory portals, the eyes, and we endeavour to protect the other senses from all stimuli or from any change of the
stimuli already acting upon them. We then fall asleep, although our preparations are never wholly successful. For we can never completely
insulate the sensory organs, nor can we entirely abolish the excitability of the sensory organs themselves. That we may at any time be awakened
by intenser stimuli should prove to us "that the mind has remained in constant communication with the external world even during sleep." The
sensory stimuli that reach us during sleep may easily become the source of dreams.
There are a great many stimuli of this nature, ranging from those unavoidable stimuli which are proper to the state of sleep or occasionally
admitted by it, to those fortuitous stimuli which are calculated to wake the sleeper. Thus a strong light may fall upon the eyes, a noise may be
heard, or an odour may irritate the mucous membranes of the nose. In our unintentional movements during sleep we may lay bare parts of the
body, and thus expose them to a sensation of cold, or by a change of position we may excite sensations of pressure and touch. A mosquito may
bite us, or a slight nocturnal mischance may simultaneously attack more than one sense-organ. Observers have called attention to a whole series
of dreams in which the stimulus ascertained on waking and some part of the dream-content corresponded to such a degree that the stimulus could
be recognized as the source of the dream.
I shall here cite a number of such dreams, collected by Jessen (p. 527), which are traceable to more or less accidental objective sensory stimuli.
Every noise indistinctly perceived gives rise to corresponding dream-representations; the rolling of thunder takes us into the thick of battle, the
crowing of a cock may be transformed into human shrieks of terror, and the creaking of a door may conjure up dreams of burglars breaking into
the house. When one of our blankets slips off us at night we may dream that we are walking about naked, or falling into water. If we lie
diagonally across the bed with our feet extending beyond the edge, we may dream of standing on the brink of a terrifying precipice, or of falling
from a great height. Should our head accidentally get under the pillow we may imagine a huge rock overhanging us and about to crush us under
its weight. An accumulation of semen produces voluptuous dreams, and local pains give rise to ideas of suffering ill-treatment, of hostile attacks,
or of accidental bodily injuries....
"Meier (Versuch einer Erklarung des Nachtwandelns, Halle, 1758, p. 33) once dreamed of being attacked by several men who threw him flat on
the ground and drove a stake into the earth between his first and second toes. While imagining this in his dream he suddenly awoke and felt a
piece of straw sticking between his toes. The same author, according to Hemmings (Von den Traumen und Nachtwandlern, Weimar, 1784, p.
258), "dreamed on another occasion, when his nightshirt was rather too tight round his neck, that he was being hanged. In his youth Hoffbauer
dreamed of having fallen from a high wall, and found, on waking, that the bedstead had come apart, and that he had actually fallen on to the
floor.... Gregory relates that he once applied a hot-water bottle to his feet, and dreamed of taking a trip to the summit of Mount Etna, where he
found the heat of the soil almost unbearable. After having a blister applied to his head, another man dreamed of being scalped by Indians; still
another, whose shirt was damp, dreamed that he was dragged through a stream. An attack of gout caused a patient to believe that he was in the
hands of the Inquisition, and suffering the pains of torture (Macnish)."
The argument that there is a resemblance between the dream-stimulus and the dream-content would be confirmed if, by a systematic induction of
stimuli, we should succeed in producing dreams corresponding to these stimuli. According to Macnish such experiments had already been made
by Giron de Buzareingues. "He left his knee exposed and dreamed of travelling on a mail-coach by night. He remarked, in this connection, that
travellers were well aware how cold the knees become in a coach at night. On another occasion he left the back of his head uncovered, and
dreamed that he was taking part in a religious ceremony in the open air. In the country where he lived it was customary to keep the head always
covered except on occasions of this kind."
Maury reports fresh observation on self-induced dreams of his own. (A number of other experiments were unsuccessful.)
1. He was tickled with a feather on his lips and on the tip of his nose. He dreamed of an awful torture, viz., that a mask of pitch was stuck to his
face and then forcibly torn off, bringing the skin with it.
2. Scissors were whetted against a pair of tweezers. He heard bells ringing, then sounds of tumult which took him back to the days of the
Revolution of 1848.
3. Eau de Cologne was held to his nostrils. He found himself in Cairo, in the shop of Johann Maria Farina. This was followed by fantastic
adventures which he was not able to recall. 
4. His neck was lightly pinched. He dreamed that a blister was being applied, and thought of a doctor who had treated him in childhood.
5. A hot iron was brought near his face. He dreamed that chauffeurs[14] had broken into the house, and were forcing the occupants to give up
their money by thrusting their feet into braziers. The Duchesse d'Abrantes, whose secretary he imagined himself to be then entered the room.
6. A drop of water was allowed to fall on to his forehead. He imagined himself in Italy, perspiring heavily, and drinking the white wine of
Orvieto.
7. When the light of a candle screened with red paper was allowed to fall on his face, he dreamed of thunder, of heat, and of a storm at sea which
he once witnessed in the English Channel.
Hervey, Weygandt, and others have made attempts to produce dreams experimentally.
Many have observed the striking skill of the dream in interweaving into its structure sudden impressions from the outer world, in such a manner
as to represent a gradually approaching catastrophe (Hildebrandt). "In former years," this author relates, "I occasionally made use of an alarmclock in order to wake punctually at a certain hour in the morning. It probably happened hundreds of times that the sound of this instrument fitted
into an apparently very long and connected dream, as though the entire dream had been especially designed for it, as though it found in this sound
its appropriate and logically indispensable climax, its inevitable denouement."
I shall presently have occasion to cite three of these alarm-clock dreams in a different connection.
Volkelt (p. 68) relates: "A composer once dreamed that he was teaching a class, and was just explaining something to his pupils. When he had
finished he turned to one of the boys with the question: 'Did you understand me?' The boy cried out like one possessed 'Oh, ja!' Annoyed by this,
he reprimanded his pupil for shouting. But now the entire class was screaming 'Orja,' then 'Eurjo,' and finally 'Feuerjo.' He was then aroused by
the actual fire alarm in the street."
Garnier (Traite des facultes de l'ame, 1865), on the authority of Radestock, relates that Napoleon I, while sleeping in a carriage, was awakened
from a dream by an explosion which took him back to the crossing of the Tagliamento and the bombardment of the Austrians, so that he started
up, crying, "We have been undermined."
The following dream of Maury's has become celebrated: He was ill in bed; his mother was sitting beside him. He dreamed of the Reign of Terror
during the Revolution. He witnessed some terrible scenes of murder, and finally he himself was summoned before the Tribunal. There he saw
Robespierre, Marat, Fouquier-Tinville, and all the sorry heroes of those terrible days; he had to give an account of himself, and after all manner of
incidents which did not fix themselves in his memory, he was sentenced to death. Accompanied by an enormous crowd, he was led to the place of
execution. He mounted the scaffold; the executioner tied him to the plank, it tipped over, and the knife of the guillotine fell. He felt his head
severed from his trunk, and awakened in terrible anxiety, only to find that the head-board of the bed had fallen, and had actually struck the
cervical vertebrae just where the knife of the guillotine would have fallen.
This dream gave rise to an interesting discussion, initiated by Le Lorrain and Egger in the Revue Philosophique, as to whether, and how, it was
possible for the dreamer to crowd together an amount of dream-content apparently so large in the short space of time elapsing between the
perception of the waking stimulus and the moment of actual waking.
Examples of this nature show that objective stimuli occurring in sleep are among the most firmly-established of all the sources of dreams; they
are, indeed, the only stimuli of which the layman knows anything whatever. If we ask an educated person who is not familiar with the literature of
dreams how dreams originate, he is certain to reply by a reference to a case known to him in which a dream has been explained after waking by a
recognized objective stimulus. Science, however, cannot stop here, but is incited to further investigation by the observation that the stimulus
influencing the senses during sleep does not appear in the dream at all in its true form, but is replaced by some other representation, which is in
some way related to it. But the relation existing between the stimulus and the resulting dream is, according to Maury, "une affinite quelconque
mais qui n'est pas unique et exclusive"[15] (p. 72). If we read, for example, three of Hildebrandt's "alarm-clock dreams," we shall be compelled to
ask why the same casual stimulus evoked so many different results, and why just these results and no others.
(p. 37): "I am taking a walk on a beautiful spring morning. I stroll through the green meadows to a neighbouring village, where I see numbers of
the inhabitants going to church, wearing their best clothes and carrying their hymn-books under their arms. I remember that it is Sunday, and that
the morning service will soon begin. I decide to attend it, but as I am rather overheated I think I will wait in the churchyard until I am cooler.
While reading the various epitaphs, I hear the sexton climbing the church-tower, and I see above me the small bell which is about to ring for the
beginning of service. For a little while it hangs motionless; then it begins to swing, and suddenly its notes resound so clearly and penetratingly
that my sleep comes to an end. But the notes of the bell come from the alarm-clock." 
"A second combination. It is a bright winter day; the streets are deep in snow. I have promised to go on a sleigh-ride, but I have to wait some time
before I am told that the sleigh is at the door. Now I am preparing to get into the sleigh. I put on my furs, the foot-warmer is put in, and at last I
have taken my seat. But still my departure is delayed. At last the reins are twitched, the horses start, and the sleigh bells, now violently shaken,
strike up their familiar music with a force that instantly tears the gossamer of my dream. Again it is only the shrill note of my alarm-clock."
"Yet a third example. I see the kitchen-maid walking along the passage to the dining-room, with a pile of several dozen plates. The porcelain
column in her arms seems to me to be in danger of losing its equilibrium. 'Take care,' I exclaim, 'you will drop the whole pile!' The usual retort is
naturally made - that she is used to such things, etc. Meanwhile I continue to follow her with my anxious gaze, and behold, at the threshold the
fragile plates fall and crash and roll across the floor in hundreds of pieces. But I soon perceive that the endless din is not really a rattling but a trueringing, and with this ringing the dreamer now becomes aware that the alarm-clock has done its duty."
The question why the dreaming mind misjudges the nature of the objective sensory stimulus has been answered by Strumpell, and in an almost
identical fashion by Wundt; their explanation is that the reaction of the mind to the stimulus attacking sleep is complicated and confused by the
formation of illusions. A sensory impression is recognized by us and correctly interpreted - that is, it is classed with the memory-group to which it
belongs according to all previous experience if the impression is strong, clear, and sufficiently prolonged, and if we have sufficient time to submit
it to those mental processes. But if these conditions are not fulfilled we mistake the object which gives rise to the impression, and on the basis of
this impression we construct an illusion. "If one takes a walk in an open field and perceives indistinctly a distant object, it may happen that one
will at first take it for a horse." On closer inspection the image of a cow, resting, may obtrude itself, and the picture may finally resolve itself with
certainty into a group of people sitting on the ground. The impressions which the mind receives during sleep from external stimuli are of a
similarly indistinct nature; they give rise to illusions because the impression evokes a greater or lesser number of memory-images, through which
it acquires its psychic value. As for the question, in which of the many possible spheres of memory the corresponding images are aroused, and
which of the possible associative connections are brought into play, that - to quote Strumpell again - is indeterminable, and is left, as it were, to
the caprices of the mind.
Here we may take our choice. We may admit that the laws of dream-formation cannot really be traced any further, and so refrain from asking
whether or not the interpretation of the illusion evoked by the sensory impression depends upon still other conditions; or we may assume that the
objective sensory stimulus encroaching upon sleep plays only a modest role as a dream-source, and that other factors determine the choice of the
memory-image to be evoked. Indeed, on carefully examining Maury's experimentally produced dreams, which I have purposely cited in detail,
one is inclined to object that his investigations trace the origin of only one element of the dreams, and that the rest of the dream-content seems too
independent and too full of detail to be explained by a single requirement, namely, that it must correspond with the element experimentally
introduced. Indeed, one even begins to doubt the illusion theory, and the power of objective impressions to shape the dream, when one realizes
that such impressions are sometimes subjected to the most peculiar and far-fetched interpretations in our dreams. Thus M. Simon tells of a dream
in which he saw persons of gigantic stature[16] seated at a table, and heard distinctly the horrible clattering produced by the impact of their jaws
as they chewed their food. On waking he heard the clatter of a horse's hooves as it galloped past his window. If in this case the sound of the
horse's hooves had revived ideas from the memory-sphere of Gulliver's Travels, the sojourn with the giants of Brobdingnag, and the virtuous
horse-like creatures - as I should perhaps interpret the dream without any assistance on the author's part - ought not the choice of a memorysphere so alien to the stimulus to be further elucidated by other motives?
2. Internal (subjective) sensory stimuli
All objections to the contrary notwithstanding, we must admit that the role of the objective sensory stimuli as producers of dreams has been
indisputably established, and if, having regard to their nature and their frequency, these stimuli seem perhaps insufficient to explain all dreampictures, this indicates that we should look for other dream-sources which act in a similar fashion. I do not know where the idea first arose that
together with the external sensory stimuli the internal (subjective) stimuli should also be considered, but as a matter of fact this has been done
more or less explicitly in all the more recent descriptions of the aetiology of dreams. "I believe," says Wundt (p. 363), "that an important part is
played in dream-illusions by those subjective sensations of sight and hearing which are familiar to us in the waking state as a luminous chaos in
the dark field of the vision, and a ringing, buzzing, etc., of the ears, and in especial, subjective irritations of the retina. This explains the
remarkable tendency of dreams to delude the eyes with numbers of similar or identical objects. Thus we see outspread before our eyes
innumerable birds, butterflies, fishes, coloured beads, flowers, etc. Here the luminous dust in the dark field of vision has assumed fantastic forms,
and the many luminous points of which it consists are embodied in our dreams in as many single images, which, owing to the mobility of the
luminous chaos, are seen as moving objects. This is perhaps the reason of the dream's decided preference for the most varied animal forms, for
owing to the multiplicity of such forms they can readily adapt themselves to the subjective luminous images."
The subjective sensory stimuli as a source of dreams have the obvious advantage that, unlike objective stimuli, they are independent of external
accidents. They are, so to speak, at the disposal of the interpretation whenever they are required. But they are inferior to the objective sensory
stimuli by the fact that their claim to the role of dream-inciters - which observation and experiment have established in the case of objective
stimuli - can in their case be verified with difficulty or not at all. The main proof of the dream-inciting power of subjective sensory stimuli is
afforded by the so-called hypnogogic hallucinations, which have been described by Johann Muller as "phantastic visual manifestations." They are
those very vivid and changeable pictures which with many people occur constantly during the period of falling asleep, and which may linger for a
while even after the eyes have been opened. Maury, who was very subject to these pictures, made a thorough study of them, and maintained that 
they were related to or rather identical with dream-images. This had already been asserted by Johann Muller. Maury maintains that a certain
psychic passivity is necessary for their origin; that it requires a relaxation of the intensity of attention (p. 59). But one may perceive a hypnogogic
hallucination in any frame of mind if one falls into such a lethargy for a moment, after which one may perhaps wake up, until this oft-repeated
process terminates in sleep. According to Maury, if one wakes up shortly after such an experience, it is often possible to trace in the dream the
images which one has perceived before falling asleep as hypnogogic hallucinations (p. 134). Thus Maury on one occasion saw a series of images
of grotesque figures with distorted features and curiously dressed hair, which obtruded themselves upon him with incredible importunity during
the period of falling asleep, and which, upon waking, he recalled having seen in his dream. On another occasion, while suffering from hunger,
because he was subjecting himself to a rather strict diet, he saw in one of his hypnogogic states a plate, and a hand armed with a fork taking some
food from the plate. In his dream he found himself at a table abundantly supplied with food, and heard the clatter of the diner's forks. On yet
another occasion, after falling asleep with strained and painful eyes, he had a hypnogogic hallucination of microscopically small characters,
which he was able to decipher, one by one, only with a great effort; and on waking from sleep an hour later he recalled a dream in which there
was an open book with very small letters, which he was obliged to read through with laborious effort.
Not only pictures, but auditory hallucinations of words, names, etc., may also occur hypnogogically, and then repeat themselves in the dream, like
an overture announcing the principal motif of the opera which is to follow.
A more recent observer of hypnogogic hallucinations, G. Trumbull Ladd, follows the same lines as Johann Muller and Maury. By dint of practice
he succeeded in acquiring the faculty of suddenly arousing himself, without opening his eyes, two to five minutes after gradually falling asleep.
This enabled him to compare the disappearing retinal sensations with the dream-images remaining in his memory. He assures us that an intimate
relation between the two can always be recognized, inasmuch as the luminous dots and lines of light spontaneously perceived by the retina
produce, so to speak, the outline or scheme of the psychically perceived dream-images. For example, a dream in which he saw before him clearly
printed lines, which he read and studied, corresponded with a number of luminous spots arranged in parallel lines; or, to express it in his own
words: The clearly printed page resolved itself into an object which appeared to his waking perception like part of an actual printed page seen
through a small hole in a sheet of paper, but at a distance too great to permit of its being read. Without in any way underestimating the central
element of the phenomenon, Ladd believes that hardly any visual dream occurs in our minds that is not based on material furnished by this
internal condition of retinal irritability. This is particularly true of dreams which occur shortly after falling asleep in a dark room, while dreams
occurring in the morning, near the period of waking, receive their stimulus from the objective light penetrating the eye in a brightly-lit room. The
shifting and infinitely variable character of the spontaneous luminous excitations of the retina exactly corresponds with the fitful succession of
images presented to us in our dreams. If we attach any importance to Ladd's observations, we cannot underrate the productiveness of this
subjective source of stimuli; for visual images, as we know, are the principal constituents of our dreams. The share contributed by the other
senses, excepting, perhaps, the sense of hearing, is relatively insignificant and inconstant.
3. Internal (organic) physical stimuli
If we are disposed to look for the sources of dreams not outside but inside the organism, we must remember that almost all our internal organs,
which in a state of health hardly remind us of their existence, may, in states of excitation - as we call them - or in disease, become a source of the
most painful sensations, and must therefore be put on a par with the external excitants of pain and sensation. Strumpell, for example, gives
expression to a long-familiar experience when he declares that "during sleep the psyche becomes far more deeply and broadly conscious of its
coporality than in the waking state, and it is compelled to receive and to be influenced by certain stimulating impressions originating in parts of
the body, and in alterations of the body, of which it is unconscious in the waking state." Even Aristotle declares it to be quite possible that a
dream may draw our attention to incipient morbid conditions which we have not noticed in the waking state (owing to the exaggerated intensity
of the impressions experienced in the dream; and some medical authors, who certainly did not believe in the prophetic nature of dreams, have
admitted the significance of dreams, at least in so far as the predicting of disease is concerned. [Cf. M. Simon, p. 31, and many earlier
writers.][17]
Among the Greeks there were dream oracles, which were vouchsafed to patients in quest of recovery. The patient betook himself to the temple of
Apollo or Aesculapius; there he was subjected to various ceremonies, bathed, rubbed and perfumed. A state of exaltation having been thus
induced, he was made to lie down in the temple on the skin of a sacrificial ram. He fell asleep and dreamed of remedies, which he saw in their
natural form, or in symbolic images which the priests afterwards interpreted.
For further references concerning the remedial dreams of the Greeks, cf. Lehmann, i, 74; Bouche-Leclerq; Hermann, Gottesd. Altert. d. Gr., SS
41; Privataltert. SS 38, 16; Bottinger in Sprengel's Beitr. z. Gesch. d. Med., ii, p. 163, et seq.; W. Lloyd, Magnetism and Mesmerism in Antiquity,
London, 1877; Dollinger, Heidentum und Judentum, p. 130.
Even in our days there seems to be no lack of authenticated examples of such diagnostic achievements on the part of dreams. Thus Tissie cites
from Artigues (Essai sur la valeur semeiologique des Reves) the history of a woman of forty-three, who, during several years of apparently
perfect health, was troubled with anxiety-dreams, and in whom a medical examination subsequently revealed an incipient affection of the heart, to
which she presently succumbed.
Serious derangements of the internal organs clearly excite dreams in quite a number of persons. The frequency of anxiety-dreams in diseases of 
the heart and lungs has been generally realized; indeed, this function of the dream-life is emphasized by so many writers that I shall here content
myself with a reference to the literature of the subject (Radestock, Spitta, Maury, M. Simon, Tissie). Tissie even believes that the diseased organs
impress upon the dream-content its characteristic features. The dreams of persons suffering from diseases of the heart are generally very brief, and
end in a terrified awakening; death under terrible circumstances almost always find a place in their content. Those suffering from diseases of the
lungs dream of suffocation, of being crushed, and of flight, and a great many of them are subject to the familiar nightmare - which, by the way,
Borner has succeeded in inducing experimentally by lying on the face and covering the mouth and nostrils. In digestive disturbances the dream
contains ideas from the sphere of gustatory enjoyment and disgust. Finally, the influence of sexual excitement on the dream-content is obvious
enough in everyone's experience, and provides the strongest confirmation of the whole theory of dream-instigation by organic sensation.
Moreover, if we study the literature of dreams it becomes quite evident that some writers (Maury, Weygandt) have been led to the study of dreamproblems by the influence their own pathological state has had on the content of their dreams.
The enlargement of the number of dream-sources by such undeniably established facts is, however, not so important as one might be led to
suppose; for dreams are, after all, phenomena which occur in healthy persons - perhaps in all persons, and every night - and a pathological state ofthe organs is evidently not one of the indispensable conditions. For us, however, the question is not whence particular dreams originate, but
rather: what is the exciting cause of ordinary dreams in normal people?
But we have only to go a step farther to find a source of dreams which is more prolific than any of those mentioned above, and which promises
indeed to be inexhaustible. If it is established that the bodily organs become, in sickness, an exciting source of dreams, and if we admit that the
mind, when diverted during sleep from the outer world, can devote more of its attention to the interior of the body, we may readily assume that
the organs need not necessarily become diseased in order to permit stimuli, which in one way or another grow into dream-images, to reach the
sleeping mind. What in the waking state we vaguely perceive as a general sensation, perceptible by its quality alone - a sensation to which, in the
opinion of physicians, all the organic systems contribute their share - this general sensation would at night attain a greater potency, and, acting
through its individual components, would constitute the most prolific as well as the most usual source of dream-representations. We should then
have to discover the laws by which organic stimuli are translated into dream-representations.
This theory of the origin of dreams is the one most favoured by all medical writers. The obscurity which conceals the essence of our being - the
"moi splanchnique" as Tissie terms it - from our knowledge, and the obscurity of the origin of dreams, correspond so closely that it was inevitable
that they should be brought into relation with one another. The theory according to which the organic sensations are responsible for dreams has,
moreover, another attraction for the physician, inasmuch as it favours the aetiological union of the dream with mental derangement, both of which
reveal so many points of agreement in their manifestations, since changes in the general organic massive sensation and in the stimuli emanating
from the internal organs are also considered to have a far-reaching significance as regards the origin of the psychoses. It is therefore not surprisingthat the organic stimulus theory can be traced to several writers who have propounded this theory independently.
A number of writers have followed the train of thought developed by Schopenhauer in 1851. Our conception of the universe has its origin in the
recasting by the intellect of the impressions which reach it from without in the moulds of time, space and causality. During the day the stimuli
proceeding from the interior of the organism, from the sympathetic nervous system, exert at most an unconscious influence on our mood. At
night, however, when the overwhelming effect of the impressions of the day is no longer operative, the impressions that surge upward from
within are able to force themselves on our attention - just as in the night we hear the rippling of the brook that was drowned in the clamour of the
day. But how else can the intellect react to these stimuli than by transforming them in accordance with its own function into things which occupy
space and time and follow the lines of causality? - and so a dream originates. Thus Scherner, and after him Volkelt, endeavoured to discover the
more intimate relations between physical sensations and dream-pictures; but we shall reserve the discussion of this point for our chapter on the
theory of dreams.
As a result of a singularly logical analysis, the psychiatrist Krauss referred the origin of dreams, and also of deliria and delusions, to the same
element, namely, to organically determined sensations. According to him, there is hardly any part of the organism which might not become the
starting-point of a dream or a delusion. Organically determined sensations, he says, "may be divided into two classes: (1) general sensations -
those affecting the whole system; (2) specific sensations - those that are immanent in the principal systems of the vegetative organism, and which
may in turn be subdivided into five groups: (a) the muscular, (b) the pneumatic, (c) the gastric, (d) the sexual, (e) the peripheral sensations (p. 33
of the second article)."
The origin of the dream-image from physical sensations is conceived by Krauss as follows: The awakened sensation, in accordance with some
law of association, evokes an idea or image bearing some relation to it, and combines with this idea or image, forming an organic structure,
towards which, however, the consciousness does not maintain its normal attitude. For it does not bestow any attention on the sensation, but
concerns itself entirely with the accompanying ideas; and this explains why the facts of the case have been so long misunderstood (p. 11 ff.).
Krauss even gives this process the special name of "transubstantiation of the sensations into dream-images" (p. 24).
The influence of organic physical stimuli on the formation of dreams is today almost universally admitted, but the question as to the nature of the
law underlying this relation is answered in various ways, and often obscurely. On the basis of the theory of physical excitation the special task of 
dream-interpretation is to trace back the content of a dream to the causative organic stimulus, and if we do not accept the rules of interpretation
advanced by Scherner, we shall often find ourselves confronted by the awkward fact that the organic source of excitation reveals itself only in the
content of the dream.
A certain agreement, however, appears in the interpretation of the various forms of dreams which have been designated as "typical," because they
recur in so many persons with almost the same content. Among these are the well-known dreams of falling from a height, of the dropping out of
teeth, of flying, and of embarrassment because one is naked or scantily clad. This last type of dream is said to be caused simply by the dreamer's
perception, felt in his sleep, that he has thrown off the bedclothes and is uncovered. The dream that one's teeth are dropping out is explained by
"dental irritation," which does not, however, of necessity imply a morbid condition of irritability in the teeth. According to Strumpell, the flying
dream is the adequate image employed by the mind to interpret the quantum of stimulus emanating from the rising and sinking of the pulmonary
lobes when the cutaneous sensation of the thorax has lapsed into insensibility. This latter condition causes the sensation which gives rise to
images of hovering in the air. The dream of falling from a height is said to be due to the fact that an arm falls away from the body, or a flexed
knee is suddenly extended, after unconsciousness of the sensation of cutaneous pressure has supervened, whereupon this sensation returns to
consciousness, and the transition from unconsciousness to consciousness embodies itself psychically as a dream of falling (Strumpell, p. 118).
The weakness of these fairly plausible attempts at explanation clearly lies in the fact that without any further elucidation they allow this or that
group of organic sensations to disappear from psychic perception, or to obtrude themselves upon it, until the constellation favourable for the
explanation has been established. Later on, however, I shall have occasion to return to the subject of typical dreams and their origin.
From a comparison of a series of similar dreams, M. Simon endeavoured to formulate certain rules governing the influence of organic sensations
on the nature of the resulting dream. He says (p. 34): "If during sleep any organic apparatus, which normally participates in the expression of an
affect, for any reason enters into the state of excitation to which it is usually aroused by the affect, the dream thus produced will contain
representations which harmonize with that affect."
Another rule reads as follows (p. 35): "If, during sleep, an organic apparatus is in a state of activity, stimulation, or disturbance, the dream will
present ideas which correspond with the nature of the organic function performed by that apparatus."
Mourly Vold has undertaken to prove the supposed influence of bodily sensation on the production of dreams by experimenting on a single
physiological territory. He changed the positions of a sleeper's limbs, and compared the resulting dreams with these changes. He recorded the
following results:
1. The position of a limb in a dream corresponds approximately to that of reality, i.e., we dream of a static condition of the limb which
corresponds with the actual condition.
2. When one dreams of a moving limb it always happens that one of the positions occurring in the execution of this movement corresponds with
the actual position.
3. The position of one's own limb may in the dream be attributed to another person.
4. One may also dream that the movement in question is impeded.
5. The limb in any particular position may appear in the dream as an animal or monster, in which case a certain analogy between the two is
established.
6. The behaviour of a limb may in the dream incite ideas which bear some relation or other to this limb. Thus, for example, if we are using our
fingers we dream of numerals.
Results such as these would lead me to conclude that even the theory of organic stimulation cannot entirely abolish the apparent freedom of the
determination of the dream-picture which will be evoked.[18]
4. Psychic sources of excitation
When considering the relation of dreams to waking life, and the provenance of the material of dreams, we learned that the earliest as well as the
most recent investigators are agreed that men dream of what they do during the day, and of the things that interest them in the waking state. This
interest, continued from waking life into sleep, is not only a psychic bond, joining the dream to life, but it is also a source of dreams whose
importance must not be underestimated, and which, taken together with those stimuli which become active and of interest during sleep, suffices to
explain the origin of all dream-images. Yet we have also heard the very contrary of this asserted; namely, that dreams bear the sleeper away from
the interests of the day, and that in most cases we do not dream of things which have occupied our attention during the day until after they have
lost, for our waking life, the stimulating force of belonging to the present. Hence in the analysis of dream-life we are reminded at every step that it
is inadmissible to frame general rules without making provision for qualifications by introducing such terms as "frequently," "as a rule," "in most 
cases," and without being prepared to admit the validity of exceptions.
If interest during the waking state together with the internal and external stimuli that occur during sleep, sufficed to cover the whole aetiology of
dreams, we should be in a position to give a satisfactory account of the origin of all the elements of a dream; the problem of the dream-sources
would then be solved, leaving us only the task of discriminating between the part played by the psychic and that played by the somatic dreamstimuli in individual dreams. But as a matter of fact no such complete solution of a dream has ever been achieved in any case, and everyone who
has attempted such a solution has found that components of the dream - and usually a great many of them - are left whose source he is unable to
trace. The interests of the day as a psychic source of dreams are obviously not so influential as to justify the confident assertion that every
dreamer continues the activities of his waking life in his dreams.
Other dream-sources of a psychic nature are not known. Hence, with the exception perhaps of the explanation of dreams given by Scherner, to
which reference will be made later on, all the explanations found in the literature of the subject show a considerable hiatus whenever there is a
question of tracing the images and ideas which are the most characteristic material of dreams. In this dilemma the majority of authors have
developed a tendency to belittle as far as possible the share of the psychic factor, which is so difficult to determine, in the evocation of dreams. To
be sure, they distinguish as major divisions the nerve-stimulus dream and the association-dream, and assert that the latter has its source
exclusively in reproduction (Wundt, p. 365), but they cannot dismiss the doubt as to "whether they appear without any impulsion from organic
stimuli" (Volkelt, p. 127). And even the characteristic quality of the pure association-dream disappears. To quote Volkelt (p. 118): "In the
association-dream proper, there is no longer any question of such a stable nucleus. Here the loose grouping penetrates even to the very centre of
the dream. The imaginative life, already released from the control of reason and intellect, is here no longer held together by the more important
psychical and physical stimuli, but is left to its own uncontrolled and confused divagations." Wundt, too, attempts to belittle the psychic factor in
the evocation of dreams by asserting that "the phantasms of the dream are perhaps unjustly regarded as pure hallucinations. Probably most dreamrepresentations are really illusions, inasmuch as they emanate from the slight sensory impressions which are never extinguished during sleep" (p.
359, et seq.). Weygandt has adopted this view, and generalizes upon it. He asserts that "the most immediate causes of all dream-representations
are sensory stimuli to which reproductive associations then attach themselves" (p. 17). Tissie goes still further in suppressing the psychic sources
of excitation (p. 183): "Les reves d'origine absolument psychique n'existent pas";[19] and elsewhere (p. 6), "Les pensees de nos reves nous
viennent de dehors...."[20]
Those writers who, like the eminent philosopher Wundt, adopt a middle course, do not hesitate to assert that in most dreams there is a cooperation
of the somatic stimuli and psychic stimuli which are either unknown or are identified with the interests of the day.
We shall learn later that the problem of dream-formation may be solved by the disclosure of an entirely unsuspected psychic source of excitation.
In the meanwhile we shall not be surprised at the over-estimation of the influence of those stimuli which do not originate in the psychic life. It is
not merely because they alone may easily be found, and even confirmed by experiment, but because the somatic conception of the origin of
dreams entirely corresponds with the mode of thought prevalent in modern psychiatry. Here, it is true, the mastery of the brain over the organism
is most emphatically stressed; but everything that might show that the psychic life is independent of demonstrable organic changes, or
spontaneous in its manifestations, is alarming to the contemporary psychiatrist, as though such an admission must mean a return to the old-world
natural philosophy and the metaphysical conception of the nature of the soul. The distrust of the psychiatrist has placed the psyche under tutelage,
so to speak; it requires that none of the impulses of the psyche shall reveal an autonomous power. Yet this attitude merely betrays a lack of
confidence in the stability of the causal concatenation between the physical and the psychic. Even where on investigation the psychic may be
recognized as the primary cause of a phenomenon, a more profound comprehension of the subject will one day succeed in following up the path
that leads to the organic basis of the psychic. But where the psychic must, in the present state of our knowledge, be accepted as the terminus, it
need not on that account be disavowed.
D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten After Waking
That a dream fades away in the morning is proverbial. It is, indeed, possible to recall it. For we know the dream, of course, only by recalling it
after waking; but we very often believe that we remember it incompletely, that during the night there was more of it than we remember. We may
observe how the memory of a dream which in the morning was still vivid fades in the course of the day, leaving only a few trifling remnants. We
are often aware that we have been dreaming, but we do not know of what we have dreamed; and we are so well used to this fact - that the dream
is liable to be forgotten - that we do not reject as absurd the possibility that we may have been dreaming even when, in the morning, we know
nothing either of the content of the dream or of the fact that we have dreamed. On the other hand, it often happens that dreams manifest an
extraordinary power of maintaining themselves in the memory. I have had occasion to analyse, with my patients, dreams which occurred to them
twenty-five years or more previously, and I can remember a dream of my own which is divided from the present day by at least thirty-seven
years, and yet has lost nothing of its freshness in my memory. All this is very remarkable, and for the present incomprehensible.
The forgetting of dreams is treated in the most detailed manner by Strumpell. This forgetting is evidently a complex phenomenon; for Strumpell
attributes it not to a single cause, but to quite a number of causes.
In the first place, all those factors which induce forgetfulness in the waking state determine also the forgetting of dreams. In the waking state we 
commonly very soon forget a great many sensations and perceptions because they are too slight to remember, and because they are charged with
only a slight amount of emotional feeling. This is true also of many dream-images; they are forgotten because they are too weak, while the
stronger images in their neighbourhood are remembered. However, the factor of intensity is in itself not the only determinant of the preservation
of dream-images; Strumpell, as well as other authors (Calkins), admits that dream-images are often rapidly forgotten although they are known to
have been vivid, whereas, among those that are retained in the memory, there are many that are very shadowy and unmeaning. Besides, in the
waking state one is wont to forget rather easily things that have happened only once, and to remember more readily things which occur
repeatedly. But most dream-images are unique experiences,[21] and this peculiarity would contribute towards the forgetting of all dreams equally.
Of much greater significance is a third cause of forgetting. In order that feelings, representations, ideas and the like should attain a certain degree
of memorability, it is important that they should not remain isolated, but that they should enter into connections and associations of an appropriate
nature. If the words of a verse of poetry are taken and mixed together, it will be very difficult to remember them. "Properly placed, in a significant
sequence, one word helps another, and the whole, making sense, remains and is easily and lastingly fixed in the memory. Contradictions, as a
rule, are retained with just as much difficulty and just as rarely as things that are confused and disorderly." Now dreams, in most cases, lack sense
and order. Dream-compositions, by their very nature, are insusceptible of being remembered, and they are forgotten because as a rule they fall to
pieces the very next moment. To be sure, these conclusions are not entirely consistent with Radestock's observation (p. 168), that we most readily
retain just those dreams which are most peculiar.
According to Strumpell, other factors, deriving from the relation of the dream to the waking state, are even more effective in causing us to forget
our dreams. The forgetfulness of dreams manifested by the waking consciousness is evidently merely the counterpart of the fact already
mentioned, namely, that the dream hardly ever takes over an orderly series of memories from the waking state, but only certain details of these
memories, which it removes from the habitual psychic connections in which they are remembered in the waking state. The dream-composition,
therefore, has no place in the community of the psychic series which fill the mind. It lacks all mnemonic aids. "In this manner the dream-structure
rises, as it were, from the soil of our psychic life, and floats in psychic space like a cloud in the sky, quickly dispelled by the first breath of
reawakening life" (p. 87). This situation is accentuated by the fact that on waking the attention is immediately besieged by the inrushing world of
sensation, so that very few dream-images are capable of withstanding its force. They fade away before the impressions of the new day like the
stars before the light of the sun.
Finally, we should remember that the fact that most people take but little interest in their dreams is conducive to the forgetting of dreams. Anyone
who for some time applies himself to the investigation of dreams, and takes a special interest in them, usually dreams more during that period
than at any other; he remembers his dreams more easily and more frequently.
Two other reasons for the forgetting of dreams, which Bonatelli (cited by Benini) adds to those adduced by Strumpell, have already been included
in those enumerated above; namely, (1) that the difference of the general sensation in the sleeping and the waking state is unfavourable to mutual
reproduction, and (2) that the different arrangement of the material in the dream makes the dream untranslatable, so to speak, for the waking
consciousness.
It is therefore all the more remarkable, as Strumpell himself observes, that, in spite of all these reasons for forgetting the dream, so many dreams
are retained in the memory. The continual efforts of those who have written on the subject to formulate laws for the remembering of dreams
amount to an admission that here, too, there is something puzzling and unexplained. Certain peculiarities relating to the remembering of dreams
have attracted particular attention of late; for example, the fact that the dream which is believed to be forgotten in the morning may be recalled in
the course of the day on the occasion of some perception which accidentally touches the forgotten content of the dream (Radestock, Tissie). But
the whole recollection of dreams is open to an objection which is calculated greatly to depreciate its value in critical eyes. One may doubt
whether our memory, which omits so much from the dream, does not falsify what it retains.
This doubt as to the exactness of the reproduction of dreams is expressed by Strumpell when he says: "It may therefore easily happen that the
waking consciousness involuntarily interpolates a great many things in the recollection of the dream; one imagines that one has dreamt all sorts of
things which the actual dream did not contain."
Jessen (p. 547) expresses himself in very decided terms:
"Moreover, we must not lose sight of the fact, hitherto little heeded, that in the investigation and interpretation of coherent and logical dreams we
almost always take liberties with the truth when we recall a dream to memory. Unconsciously and unintentionally we fill up the gaps and
supplement the dream-images. Rarely, and perhaps never, has a connected dream been as connected as it appears to us in memory. Even the most
truth-loving person can hardly relate a dream without exaggerating and embellishing it in some degree. The human mind so greatly tends to
perceive everything in a connected form that it intentionally supplies the missing links in any dream which is in some degree incoherent."
The observations of V. Eggers, though of course independently conceived, read almost like a translation of Jessen's words:
"...L'observation des reves a ses difficultes speciales et le seul moyen d'eviter toute erreur en pareille matiere est de confier au papier sans le
moindre retard ce que l'on vient d'eprouver et de remarquer; sinon, l'oubli vient vite ou total ou partiel; l'oubli total est sans gravite; mais l'oubli 
partiel est perfide: car si l'on se met ensuite a raconter ce que l'on n'a pas oublie, on est expose a completer par imagination les fragments
incoherents et disjoints fourni par la memoire... on devient artiste a son insu, et le recit, periodiquement repete s'impose a la creance de son auteur,qui, de bonne foi, le presente comme un fait authentique, dument etabli selon les bonnes methodes...."[22]
Similarly Spitta, who seems to think that it is only in the attempt to reproduce the dream that we bring order and arrangement into loosely
associated dream-elements--"turning juxtaposition into concatenation; that is, adding the process of logical connection which is absent in the
dream."
Since we can test the reliability of our memory only by objective means, and since such a test is impossible in the case of dreams, which are our
own personal experience, and for which we know no other source than our memory, what value do our recollections of our dreams possess?
E. The Psychological Peculiarities of Dreams
In our scientific investigation of dreams we start with the assumption that dreams are a phenomenon of our own psychic activity; yet the
completed dream appears to us as something alien, whose authorship we are so little inclined to recognize that we should be just as willing to say
"A dream came to me," as "I dreamed." Whence this "psychic strangeness" of dreams? According to our exposition of the sources of dreams, we
must assume that it is not determined by the material which finds its way into the dream-content, since this is for the most part common both to
dream-life and waking life. We might ask ourselves whether this impression is not evoked by modifications of the psychic processes in dreams,
and we might even attempt to suggest that the existence of such changes is the psychological characteristic of dreams.
No one has more strongly emphasized the essential difference between dream-life and waking life and drawn more far reaching conclusions from
this difference than G. Th. Fechner in certain observations contained in his Elemente der Psychophysik (Part II, p. 520). He believes that "neither
the simple depression of conscious psychic life under the main threshold," nor the distraction of the attention from the influences of the outer
world, suffices to explain the peculiarities of dream-life as compared with waking life. He believes, rather, that the arena of dreams is other than
the arena of the waking life of the mind. "If the arena of psychophysical activity were the same during the sleeping and the waking state, the
dream, in my opinion, could only be a continuation of the waking ideational life at a lower degree of intensity, so that it would have to partake of
the form and material of the latter. But this is by no means the case."
What Fechner really meant by such a transposition of the psychic activity has never been made clear, nor has anybody else, to my knowledge,
followed the path which he indicates in this remark. An anatomical interpretation in the sense of physiological localization in the brain, or even a
histological stratification of the cerebral cortex, must of course be excluded. The idea might, however, prove ingenious and fruitful if it could
refer to a psychical apparatus built up of a number of successive and connected systems.
Other authors have been content to give prominence to this or that palpable psychological peculiarity of the dream-life, and even to take this as a
starting-point for more comprehensive attempts at explanation.
It has been justly remarked that one of the chief peculiarities of dream-life makes its appearance even in the state of falling asleep, and may be
defined as the sleep-heralding phenomenon. According to Schleiermacher (p. 351), the distinguishing characteristic of the waking state is the fact
that its psychic activity occurs in the form of ideas rather than in that of images. But the dream thinks mainly in visual images, and it may be
noted that with the approach of sleep the voluntary activities become impeded in proportion as involuntary representations make their appearance,
the latter belonging entirely to the category of images. The incapacity for such ideational activities as we feel to be deliberately willed, and the
emergence of visual images, which is regularly connected with this distraction - these are two constant characteristics of dreams, and on
psychological analysis we are compelled to recognize them as essential characteristics of dream-life. As for the images themselves the
hypnogogic hallucinations - we have learned that even in their content they are identical with dream-images.[23]
Dreams, then, think preponderantly, but not exclusively, in visual images. They make use also of auditory images, and, to a lesser extent, of the
other sensory impressions. Moreover, in dreams, as in the waking state, many things are simply thought or imagined (probably with the help of
remnants of verbal conceptions). Characteristic of dreams, however, are only those elements of their contents which behave like images, that is,
which more closely resemble perceptions than mnemonic representations. Without entering upon a discussion of the nature of hallucinations - a
discussion familiar to every psychiatrist - we may say, with every well-informed authority, that the dream hallucinates- that is, that it replaces
thoughts by hallucinations. In this respect visual and acoustic impressions behave in the same way. It has been observed that the recollection of a
succession of notes heard as we are falling asleep becomes transformed, when we have fallen asleep, into a hallucination of the same melody, to
give place, each time we wake, to the fainter and qualitatively different representations of the memory, and resuming, each time we doze off
again, its hallucinatory character.
The transformation of an idea into a hallucination is not the only departure of the dream from the more or less corresponding waking thought.
From these images the dream creates a situation; it represents something as actually present; it dramatizes an idea, as Spitta (p. 145) puts it. But
the peculiar character of this aspect of the dream-life is completely intelligible only if we admit that in dreaming we do not as a rule (the
exceptions call for special examination) suppose ourselves to be thinking, but actually experiencing; that is, we accept the hallucination in 
perfectly good faith. The criticism that one has experienced nothing, but that one has merely been thinking in a peculiar manner - dreaming -
occurs to us only on waking. It is this characteristic which distinguishes the genuine dream from the day-dream, which is never confused with
reality.
The characteristics of the dream-life thus far considered have been summed up by Burdach (p. 476) as follows: "As characteristic features of the
dream we may state (a) that the subjective activity of our psyche appears as objective, inasmuch as our perceptive faculties apprehend the
products of phantasy as though they were sensory activities... (b) that sleep abrogates our voluntary action; hence falling asleep involves a certain
degree of passivity... The images of sleep are conditioned by the relaxation of our powers of will."
It now remains to account for the credulity of the mind in respect to the dream-hallucinations which are able to make their appearance only after
the suspension of certain voluntary powers. Strumpell asserts that in this respect the psyche behaves correctly and in conformity with its
mechanism. The dream-elements are by no means mere representations, but true and actual experiences of the psyche, similar to those which
come to the waking state by way of the senses (p. 34). Whereas in the waking state the mind thinks and imagines by means of verbal images and
language, in dreams it thinks and imagines in actual perceptual images (p. 35). Dreams, moreover, reveal a spatial consciousness, inasmuch as in
dreams, just as in the waking state, sensations and images are transposed into outer space (p. 36). It must therefore be admitted that in dreams the
mind preserves the same attitude in respect of images and perceptions as in the waking state (p. 43). And if it forms erroneous conclusions in
respect of these images and perceptions, this is due to the fact that in sleep it is deprived of that criterion which alone can distinguish between
sensory perceptions emanating from within and those coming from without. It is unable to subject its images to those tests which alone can prove
their objective reality. Further, it neglects to differentiate between those images which can be exchanged at will and those in respect of which
there is no free choice. It errs because it cannot apply the law of causality to the content of its dreams (p. 58). In brief, its alienation from the outer
world is the very reason for its belief in its subjective dream-world.
Delboeuf arrives at the same conclusion through a somewhat different line of argument. We believe in the reality of dream-pictures because in
sleep we have no other impressions with which to compare them; because we are cut off from the outer world. But it is not because we are unable,
when asleep, to test our hallucinations that we believe in their reality. Dreams can make us believe that we are applying such tests - that we are
touching, say, the rose that we see in our dream; and yet we are dreaming. According to Delboeuf there is no valid criterion that can show
whether something is a dream or a waking reality, except - and that only pragmatically - the fact of waking. "I conclude that all that has been
experienced between falling asleep and waking is a delusion, if I find on waking that I am lying undressed in bed" (p. 84). "I considered the
images of my dream real while I was asleep on account of the unsleeping mental habit of assuming an outer world with which I can contrast my
ego."[24]
If the turning-away from the outer world is accepted as the decisive cause of the most conspicuous characteristics of our dreams, it will be worth
our while to consider certain subtle observations of Burdach's, which will throw some light on the relation of the sleeping psyche to the outer
world, and at the same time serve to prevent our over-estimating the importance of the above deductions. "Sleep," says Burdach, "results only
under the condition that the mind is not excited by sensory stimuli... yet it is not so much a lack of sensory stimuli that conditions sleep as a lack
of interest in them;[25] some sensory impressions are even necessary in so far as they serve to calm the mind; thus the miller can fall asleep only
when he hears the clatter of his mill, and he who finds it necessary, as a matter of precaution, to burn a light at night, cannot fall asleep in the
dark" (p. 457).
"During sleep the psyche isolates itself from the outer world, and withdraws from the periphery.... Nevertheless, the connection is not entirely
broken; if one did not hear and feel during sleep, but only after waking, one would assuredly never be awakened at all. The continuance of
sensation is even more plainly shown by the fact that we are not always awakened by the mere force of the sensory impression, but by its relation
to the psyche. An indifferent word does not arouse the sleeper, but if called by name he wakes... so that even in sleep the psyche discriminates
between sensations.... Hence one may even be awakened by the obliteration of a sensory stimulus, if this is related to anything of imagined
importance. Thus one man wakes when the nightlight is extinguished, and the miller when his mill comes to a standstill; that is, waking is due to
the cessation of a sensory activity, and this presupposes that the activity has been perceived, but has not disturbed the mind, its effect being
indifferent, or actually reassuring" (p. 46, etc.).
Even if we are willing to disregard these by no means trifling objections, we must yet admit that the qualities of dream-life hitherto considered,
which are attributed to withdrawal from the outer world, cannot fully account for the strangeness of dreams. For otherwise it would be possible to
reconvert the hallucinations of the dream into mental images, and the situations of the dream into thoughts, and thus to achieve the task of dreaminterpretation. Now this is precisely what we do when we reproduce a dream from memory after waking, and no matter whether we are fully or
only partially successful in this retranslation, the dream still remains as mysterious as before.
Furthermore, all writers unhesitatingly assume that still other and profounder changes take place in the plastic material of waking life. Strumpell
seeks to isolate one of these changes as follows: (p. 17) "With the cessation of active sensory perception and of normal consciousness, the psyche
is deprived of the soil in which its feelings, desires, interests, and activities are rooted. Those psychic states, feelings, interests, and valuations,
which in the waking state adhere to memory-images, succumb to an obscuring pressure, in consequence of which their connection with these
images is severed; the perceptual images of things, persons, localities, events and actions of the waking state are, individually, abundantly
reproduced, but none of these brings with it its psychic value. Deprived of this, they hover in the mind dependent on their own resources..." 
This annihilation of psychic values, which is in turn referred to a turning away from the outer world, is, according to Strumpell, very largely
responsible for the impression of strangeness with which the dream is coloured in our memory.
We have seen that the very fact of falling asleep involves a renunciation of one of the psychic activities - namely, the voluntary guidance of the
flow of ideas. Thus the supposition obtrudes itself (though it is in any case a natural one) that the state of sleep may extend even to the psychic
functions. One or another of these functions is perhaps entirely suspended; we have now to consider whether the rest continue to operate
undisturbed, whether they are able to perform their normal work under the circumstances. The idea occurs to us that the peculiarities of the dream
may be explained by the restricted activity of the psyche during sleep, and the impression made by the dream upon our waking judgment tends to
confirm this view. The dream is incoherent; it reconciles, without hesitation, the worst contradictions; it admits impossibilities; it disregards the
authoritative knowledge of the waking state, and it shows us as ethically and morally obtuse. He who should behave in the waking state as his
dreams represent him as behaving would be considered insane. He who in the waking state should speak as he does in his dreams, or relate such
things as occur in his dreams, would impress us as a feeble-minded or muddle-headed person. It seems to us, then, that we are merely speaking in
accordance with the facts of the case when we rate psychic activity in dreams very low, and especially when we assert that in dreams the higher
intellectual activities are suspended or at least greatly impaired.
With unusual unanimity (the exceptions will be dealt with elsewhere) the writers on the subject have pronounced such judgments as lead
immediately to a definite theory or explanation of dream-life. It is now time to supplement the resume which I have just given by a series of
quotations from a number of authors - philosophers and physicians - bearing upon the psychological characteristics of the dream.
According to Lemoine, the incoherence of the dream-images is the sole essential characteristic of the dream.
Maury agrees with him (Le Sommeil, p. 163): "Il n'y a pas des reves absolument raisonnables et qui ne contiennent quelque incoherence, quelque
absurdite."[26]
According to Hegel, quoted by Spitta, the dream lacks any intelligible objective coherence.
Dugas says: "Les reve, c'est l'anarchie psychique, affective et mentale, c'est le jeu des fonctions livrees a elles-memes et s'exercant sans controle
et sans but; dans le reve l'esprit est un automate spirituel."[27]
"The relaxation, dissolution, and promiscuous confusion of the world of ideas and images held together in waking life by the logical power of the
central ego" is conceded even by Volkelt (p. 14), according to whose theory the psychic activity during sleep appears to be by no means aimless.
The absurdity of the associations of ideas which occur in dreams can hardly be more strongly stigmatized than it was by Cicero (De Divinatione,
II. lxxi): "Nihil tam praepostere, tam incondite, tam monstruose cogitari potest, quod non possimus somniare."[28]
Fechner says (p. 522): "It is as though the psychological activity of the brain of a reasonable person were to migrate into that of a fool."
Radestock (p. 145): "It seems indeed impossible to recognize any stable laws in this preposterous behaviour. Withdrawing itself from the strict
policing of the rational will that guides our waking ideas, and from the processes of attention, the dream, in crazy sport, whirls all things about in
kaleidoscopic confusion."
Hildebrandt (p. 45): "What wonderful jumps the dreamer permits himself, for instance, in his chain of reasoning! With what unconcern he sees
the most familiar laws of experience turned upside down! What ridiculous contradictions he is able to tolerate in the order of nature and of
society, before things go too far, and the very excess of nonsense leads to an awakening! Sometimes we quite innocently calculate that three times
three make twenty; and we are not in the least surprised if a dog recites poetry to us, if a dead person walks to his grave, or if a rock floats on the
water. We solemnly go to visit the duchy of Bernburg or the principality of Liechtenstein in order to inspect its navy; or we allow ourselves to be
recruited as a volunteer by Charles XII just before the battle of Poltava."
Binz (p. 33), referring to the theory of dreams resulting from these impressions, says: "Of ten dreams nine at least have an absurd content. We
unite in them persons or things which do not bear the slightest relation to one another. In the next moment, as in a kaleidoscope, the grouping
changes to one, if possible, even more nonsensical and irrational than before; and so the shifting play of the drowsy brain continues, until we
wake, put a hand to our forehead, and ask ourselves whether we still really possess the faculty of rational imagination and thought."
Maury, Le Sommeil (p. 50) makes, in respect of the relation of the dream-image to the waking thoughts, a comparison which a physician will find
especially impressive: "La production de ces images que chez l'homme eveille fait le plus souvent naitre la volonte, correspond, pour
l'intelligence, a ce que sont pour la motilite certains mouvements que nous offrent la choree et les affections paralytiques...."[29] For the rest, he
considers the dream "toute une serie de degradations de la faculte pensante et raisonnante"[30] (p. 27). 
It is hardly necessary to cite the utterances of those authors who repeat Maury's assertion in respect of the higher individual psychic activities.
According to Strumpell, in dreams - and even, of course, where the nonsensical nature of the dream is not obvious - all the logical operations of
the mind, based on relations and associations, recede into the background (p. 26). According to Spitta (p. 148) ideas in dreams are entirely
withdrawn from the laws of causality; while Radestock and others emphasize the feebleness of judgment and logical inference peculiar to dreams.
According to Jodl (p. 123), there is no criticism in dreams, no correcting of a series of perceptions by the content of consciousness as a whole.
The same author states that "All the activities of consciousness occur in dreams, but they are imperfect, inhibited, and mutually isolated." The
contradictions of our conscious knowledge which occur in dreams are explained by Stricker and many others on the ground that facts are
forgotten in dreams, or that the logical relations between ideas are lost (p. 98), etc., etc.
Those authors who, in general, judge so unfavourably of the psychic activities of the dreamer nevertheless agree that dreams do retain a certain
remnant of psychic activity. Wundt, whose teaching has influenced so many other investigators of dream-problems, expressly admits this. We
may ask, what are the nature and composition of the remnants of normal psychic life which manifest themselves in dreams? It is pretty generally
acknowledged that the reproductive faculty, the memory, seems to be the least affected in dreams; it may, indeed, show a certain superiority over
the same function in waking life (see chapter I, B), even though some of the absurdities of dreams are to be explained by the forgetfulness of
dream-life. According to Spitta, it is the sentimental life of the psyche which is not affected by sleep, and which thus directs our dreams. By
sentiment (Gemut) he means "the constant sum of the emotions as the inmost subjective essence of the man" (p. 84).
Scholz (p. 37) sees in dreams a psychic activity which manifests itself in the "allegorizing interpretation" to which the dream-material is
subjected. Siebeck (p. 11) likewise perceives in dreams a "supplementary interpretative activity" of the psyche, which applies itself to all that is
observed and perceived. Any judgment of the part played in dreams by what is presumed to be the highest psychical function, i.e., consciousness,
presents a peculiar difficulty. Since it is only through consciousness that we can know anything of dreams, there can be no doubt as to its being
retained. Spitta, however, believes that only consciousness is retained in the dream, but not self-consciousness. Delboeuf confesses that he is
unable to comprehend this distinction.
The laws of association which connect our mental images hold good also for what is represented in dreams; indeed, in dreams the dominance of
these laws is more obvious and complete than in the waking state. Strumpell (p. 70) says: "Dreams would appear to proceed either exclusively in
accordance with the laws of pure representation, or in accordance with the laws of organic stimuli accompanied by such representations; that is,
without being influenced by reflection, reason, aesthetic taste, or moral judgment." The authors whose opinions I here reproduce conceive the
formation of the dream somewhat as follows: The sum of sensory stimuli of varying origin (discussed elsewhere) that are operative in sleep at
first awaken in the psyche a number of images which present themselves as hallucinations (according to Wundt, it is more correct to say "as
illusions," because of their origin in external and internal stimuli). These combine with one another in accordance with the known laws of
association, and, in accordance with the same laws, they in turn evoke a new series of representations (images). The whole of this material is then
elaborated as far as possible by the still active remnant of the thinking and organizing faculties of the psyche (cf. Wundt and Weygandt). Thus far,
however, no one has been successful in discerning the motive which would decide what particular law of association is to be obeyed by those
images which do not originate in external stimuli.
But it has been repeatedly observed that the associations which connect the dream-images with one another are of a particular kind, differing from
those found in the activities of the waking mind. Thus Volkelt (p. 15): "In dreams the ideas chase and seize upon one another on the strength of
accidental similarities and barely perceptible connections. All dreams are pervaded by casual and unconstrained associations of this kind." Maury
attaches great value to this characteristic of the connection of ideas, for it allows him to draw a closer analogy between the dream-life and certain
mental derangements. He recognizes two main characteristics of "deliria": "(1) une action spontanee et comme automatique de l'esprit; (2) une
association vicieuse et irreguliere des idees"[31] (p. 126). Maury gives us two excellent examples from his own dreams, in which the mere
similarity of sound decides the connection between the dream-representations. Once he dreamed that he was on a pilgrimage (pelerinage) to
Jerusalem, or to Mecca. After many adventures he found himself in the company of the chemist Pelletier; the latter, after some conversation, gave
him a galvanized shovel (pelle) which became his great broadsword in the next portion of the dream (p. 137). In another dream he was walking
along a highway where he read the distances on the kilometre-stones; presently he found himself at a grocer's who had a large pair of scales; a
man put kilogramme weights into the scales, in order to weigh Maury; the grocer then said to him: "You are not in Paris, but on the island
Gilolo." This was followed by a number of pictures, in which he saw the flower lobelia, and then General Lopez, of whose death he had read a
little while previously. Finally he awoke as he was playing a game of lotto.[32]
We are, indeed, quite well aware that this low estimate of the psychic activities of the dream has not been allowed to pass without contradiction
from various quarters. Yet here contradiction would seem rather difficult. It is not a matter of much significance that one of the depreciators of
dream-life, Spitta (p. 118), should assure us that the same psychological laws which govern the waking state rule the dream also, or that another
(Dugas) should state: "Le reve n'est pas deraison ni meme irraison pure,"[33] so long as neither of them has attempted to bring this opinion into
harmony with the psychic anarchy and dissolution of all mental functions in the dream which they themselves have described. However, the
possibility seems to have dawned upon others that the madness of the dream is perhaps not without its method- that it is perhaps only a disguise, a
dramatic pretence, like that of Hamlet, to whose madness this perspicacious judgment refers. These authors must either have refrained from
judging by appearances, or the appearances were, in their case, altogether different. 
Without lingering over its superficial absurdity, Havelock Ellis considers the dream as "an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect
thoughts," the study of which may acquaint us with the primitive stages of the development of mental life. J. Sully (p. 362) presents the same
conception of the dream in a still more comprehensive and penetrating fashion. His statements deserve all the more consideration when it is added
that he, perhaps more than any other psychologist, was convinced of the veiled significance of the dream. "Now our dreams are a means of
conserving these successive personalities. When asleep we go back to the old ways of looking at things and of feeling about them, to impulses
and activities which long ago dominated us." A thinker like Delboeuf asserts - without, indeed, adducing proof in the face of contradictory data,
and hence without real justification - "Dans le sommeil, hormis la perception, toutes les facultes de l'esprit, intelligence, imagination, memoire,
volonte, moralite, restent intactes dans leur essence; seulement, elles s'appliquent a des objets imaginaires et mobiles. Le songeur est un acteur qui
joue a volonte les fous et les sages, les bourreaux et les victimes, les nains et les geants, les demons et les anges"[34] (p. 222). The Marquis
Hervey,[35] who is flatly contradicted by Maury, and whose essay I have been unable to obtain despite all my efforts, appears emphatically to
protest against the under-estimation of the psychic capacity in the dream. Maury speaks of him as follows (p. 19): "M. le Marquis Hervey prete a
l'intelligence durant le sommeil toute sa liberte d'action et d'attention, et il ne semble faire consister le sommeil que dans l'occlusion des sens,
dans leur fermeture au monde exterieur; en sorte que l'homme qui dort ne se distingue guere, selon sa maniere de voir, de l'homme qui laisse
vaguer sa pensee en se bouchant les sens; toute la difference qui separe alors la pensee ordinaire du celle du dormeur c'est que, chez celui-ci,
l'idee prend une forme visible, objective, et ressemble, a s'y meprendre, a la sensation determinee par les objets exterieurs; le souvenir revet
l'apparence du fait present."[36]
Maury adds, however, "qu'il y a une difference de plus et capitale a savoir que les facultes intellectuelles de l'homme endormi n'offrent pas
l'equilibre qu'elles gardent chez l'homme eveille."[37]
In Vaschide, who gives us fully information as to Hervey's book, we find that this author expresses himself as follows, in respect to the apparent
incoherence of dreams: "L'image du reve est la copie de l'idee. Le principal est l'idee; la vision n'est pas qu'accessoire. Ceci etabli, il faut savoir
suivre la marche des idees, il faut savoir analyser le tissu des reves; l'incoherence devient alors comprehensible, les conceptions les plus
fantasques deviennent des faits simples et parfaitement logiques"[38] (p. 146). And (p. 147): "Les reves les plus bizarres trouvent meme une
explication des plus logiques quand on sait les analyser."[39]
J. Starke has drawn attention to the fact that a similar solution of the incoherence of dreams was put forward in 1799 by an old writer, Wolf
Davidson, who was unknown to me (p. 136): "The peculiar leaps of our imaginings in the dream-state all have their cause in the laws of
association, but this connection often occurs very obscurely in the soul, so that we frequently seem to observe a leap of the imagination where
none really exists."
The evaluation of the dream as a psychic product in the literature of the subject varies over a very wide scale; it extends from the extreme of
under-estimation, as we have already seen, through premonitions that it may have a value as yet unrevealed, to an exaggerated over-estimation,
which sets the dream-life far above the capacities of waking life. In his psychological characterization of dream-life, Hildebrandt, as we know,
groups it into three antinomies, and he combines in the third of these antinomies the two extreme points of this scale of values (p. 19): "It is the
contrast between, on the one hand, an enhancement, an increase of potentiality, which often amounts to virtuosity, and on the other hand a
decided diminution and enfeeblement of the psychic life, often to a sub-human level."
"As regards the first, who is there that cannot confirm from his own experience the fact that in the workings and weavings of the genius of
dreams, there are sometimes exhibited a profundity and sincerity of emotion, a tenderness of feeling, a clearness of view, a subtlety of observation
and a readiness of wit, such as we should have modestly to deny that we always possessed in our waking life? Dreams have a wonderful poetry,
an apposite allegory, an incomparable sense of humour, a delightful irony. They see the world in the light of a peculiar idealization, and often
intensify the effect of their phenomena by the most ingenious understanding of the reality underlying them. They show us earthly beauty in a truly
heavenly radiance, the sublime in its supremest majesty, and that which we know to be terrible in its most frightful form, while the ridiculous
becomes indescribably and drastically comical. And on waking we are sometimes still so full of one of these impressions that it will occur to us
that such things have never yet been offered to us by the real world."
One might here ask oneself: do these depreciatory remarks and these enthusiastic praises really refer to the self-same phenomenon? Have some
writers overlooked the foolish and others the profound and sensitive dreams? And if both kinds of dreams do occur - that is, dreams that merit
both these judgments - does it not seem idle to seek a psychological characterization of the dream? Would it not suffice to state that everything is
possible in the dream, from the lowest degradation of the psychic life to its flight to heights unknown in the waking state? Convenient as such a
solution might be, it has this against it: that behind the efforts of all the investigators of dreams there seems to lurk the assumption that there is in
dreams some characteristic which is universally valid in its essential features, and which must eliminate all these contradictions.
It is unquestionably true that the mental capacities of dreams found readier and warmer recognition in the intellectual period now lying behind us,
when philosophy rather than exact natural science ruled the more intelligent minds. Statements like that of Schubert, to the effect that the dream
frees the mind from the power of external nature, that it liberates the soul from the chains of sensory life, together with similar opinions expressed
by the younger Fichte[40] and others, who represent dreams as a soaring of the mind to a higher plane - all these seem hardly conceivable to us 
today; they are repeated at present only by mystics and devotees.[41] With the advance of a scientific mode of thought a reaction took place in the
estimation of dreams. It is the medical writers who are most inclined to underrate the psychic activity in dreams, as being insignificant and
valueless; while philosophers and unprofessional observers - amateur psychologists - whose contributions to the subject in especial must not be
overlooked, have for the most part, in agreement with popular belief, laid emphasis on the psychological value of dreams. Those who are inclined
to underrate the psychic activity of dreams naturally show a preference for the somatic sources of excitation in the aetiology of the dream; those
who admit that the dreaming mind may retain the greater part of its waking faculties naturally have no motive for denying the existence of
autonomous stimulations
Among the superior accomplishments which one may be tempted, even on a sober comparison, to ascribe to the dream-life, that of memory is the
most impressive. We have fully discussed the by no means rare experiences which prove this superiority. Another privilege of the dream-life,
often extolled by the older writers - namely, the fact that it can overstep the limitations of time and space - is easily recognized as an illusion. This
privilege, as Hildebrandt remarks, is merely illusory; dreams disregard time and space only as does waking thought, and only because dreaming is
itself a form of thinking. Dreams are supposed to enjoy a further advantage in respect of time - to be independent of the passage of time in yet
another sense. Dreams like Maury's dream of his execution (p. 147 above) seem to show that the perceptual content which the dream can
compress into a very short space of time far exceeds that which can be mastered by our psychic activity in its waking thoughts. These conclusions
have, however, been disputed. The essays of Le Lorrain and Egger on The Apparent Duration of Dreams gave rise to a long and interesting
discussion, which in all probability has not yet found the final explanation of this profound and delicate problem.[42]
That dreams are able to continue the intellectual activities of the day and to carry them to a point which could not be arrived at during the day,
that they may resolve doubts and problems, and that they may be the source of fresh inspiration in poets and composers, seems, in the light of
numerous records, and of the collection of instances compiled by Chabaneix, to be proved beyond question. But even though the facts may be
beyond dispute, their interpretation is subject to many doubts on wider grounds.[43]
Finally, the alleged divinatory power of the dream has become a subject of contention in which almost insuperable objections are confronted by
obstinate and reiterated assertions. It is, of course, right that we should refrain from denying that this view has any basis whatever in fact, since it
is quite possible that a number of such cases may before long be explained on purely natural psychological grounds.
F. The Ethical Sense in Dreams
For reasons which will be intelligible only after a consideration of my own investigations of dreams, I have isolated from the psychology of the
dream the subsidiary problem as to whether and to what extent the moral dispositions and feelings of waking life extend into dream-life. The
same contradictions which we were surprised to observe in the descriptions by various authors of all the other psychic activities will surprise us
again here. Some writers flatly assert that dreams know nothing of moral obligations; others as decidedly declare that the moral nature of man
persists even in his dream-life.
Our ordinary experience of dreams seems to confirm beyond all doubt the correctness of the first assertion. Jessen says (p. 553): "Nor does one
become better or more virtuous during sleep; on the contrary, it seems that conscience is silent in our dreams, inasmuch as one feels no
compassion and can commit the worst crimes, such as theft, murder, and homicide, with perfect indifference and without subsequent remorse."
Radestock (p. 146) says: "It is to be noted that in dreams associations are effected and ideas combined without being in any way influenced by
reflection, reason, aesthetic taste, and moral judgment; the judgment is extremely weak, and ethical indifference reigns supreme."
Volkelt (p. 23) expresses himself as follows: "As every one knows, dreams are especially unbridled in sexual matters. Just as the dreamer himself
is shameless in the extreme, and wholly lacking in moral feeling and judgment, so likewise does he see others, even the most respected persons,
doing things which, even in his thoughts, he would blush to associate with them in his waking state."
Utterances like those of Schopenhauer, that in dreams every man acts and talks in complete accordance with his character, are in sharpest
contradiction to those mentioned above. R. Ph. Fischer[44] maintains that the subjective feelings and desires, or affects and passions, manifest
themselves in the wilfulness of the dream-life, and that the moral characteristics of a man are mirrored in his dreams.
Haffner says (p. 25): "With rare exceptions... a virtuous man will be virtuous also in his dreams; he will resist temptation, and show no sympathy
for hatred, envy, anger, and all other vices; whereas the sinful man will, as a rule, encounter in his dreams the images which he has before him in
the waking state."
Scholz (p. 36): "In dreams there is truth; despite all camouflage of nobility or degradation, we recognize our own true selves.... The honest man
does not commit a dishonouring crime even in his dreams, or, if he does, he is appalled by it as by something foreign to his nature. The Roman
emperor who ordered one of his subjects to be executed because he dreamed that he had cut off the emperor's head was not far wrong in justifying
his action on the ground that he who has such dreams must have similar thoughts while awake. Significantly enough, we say of things that find no
place even in our intimate thoughts: 'I would never even dream of such a thing.'" 
Plato, on the other hand, considers that they are the best men who only dream the things which other men do.
Plaff,[45] varying a familiar proverb, says: "Tell me your dreams for a time and I will tell you what you are within."
The little essay of Hildebrandt's from which I have already taken so many quotations (the best-expressed and most suggestive contribution to the
literature of the dream-problem which I have hitherto discovered), takes for its central theme the problem of morality in dreams. For Hildebrandt,
too, it is an established rule that the purer the life, the purer the dream; the impurer the life, the impurer the dream.
The moral nature of man persists even in dreams. "But while we are not offended or made suspicious by an arithmetical error, no matter how
obvious, by a reversal of scientific fact, no matter how romantic, or by an anachronism, no matter how ridiculous, we nevertheless do not lose
sight of the difference between good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice. No matter how much of that which accompanies us during the day
may vanish in our hours of sleep, Kant's categorical imperative dogs our steps as an inseparable companion, of whom we cannot rid ourselves
even in our slumber.... This can be explained only by the fact that the fundamental element of human nature, the moral essence, is too firmly fixed
to be subjected to the kaleidoscopic shaking-up to which phantasy, reason, memory, and other faculties of the same order succumb in our dreams"
(p. 45, etc.).
In the further discussion of the subject we find in both these groups of authors remarkable evasions and inconsequences. Strictly speaking, all
interest in immoral dreams should be at an end for those who assert that the moral personality of the individual falls to pieces in his dreams. They
could as coolly reject all attempts to hold the dreamer responsible for his dreams, or to infer from the immorality of his dreams that there is an
immoral strain in his nature, as they have rejected the apparently analogous attempt to prove from the absurdity of his dreams the worthlessness
of his intellectual life in the waking state. The others, according to whom the categorical imperative extends even into the dream, ought to accept
in toto the notion of full responsibility for immoral dreams; and we can only hope that their own reprehensible dreams do not lead them to
abandon their otherwise firm belief in their own moral worth.
As a matter of fact, however, it would seem that although no one is positively certain just how good or how bad he is, he can hardly deny that he
can recollect immoral dreams of his own. That there are such dreams no one denies; the only question is: how do they originate? So that, in spite
of their conflicting judgments of dream-morality, both groups of authors are at pains to explain the genesis of the immoral dream; and here a new
conflict arises, as to whether its origin is to be sought in the normal functions of the psychic life, or in the somatically conditioned encroachments
upon this life. The nature of the facts compels both those who argue for and those who argue against moral responsibility in dream-life to agree in
recognizing a special psychic source for the immorality of dreams.
Those who maintain that morality continues to function in our dream-life nevertheless refrain from assuming full responsibility for their dreams.
Haffner says (p. 24): "We are not responsible for our dreams, because that basis which alone gives our life truth and reality is withdrawn from our
thoughts and our will. Hence the wishes and actions of our dreams cannot be virtuous or sinful." Yet the dreamer is responsible for the sinful
dream in so far as indirectly he brings it about. Thus, as in waking life, it is his duty, just before going to sleep, morally to cleanse his mind.
The analysis of this admixture of denial and recognition of responsibility for the moral content of dreams is carried much further by Hildebrandt.
After arguing that the dramatic method of representation characteristic of dreams, the condensation of the most complicated processes of
reflection into the briefest periods of time, and the debasement and confusion of the imaginative elements of dreams, which even he admits must
be allowed for in respect of the immoral appearance of dreams, he nevertheless confesses that there are the most serious objections to flatly
denying all responsibility for the lapses and offenses of which we are guilty in our dreams.
(p. 49): "If we wish to repudiate very decisively any sort of unjust accusation, and especially one which has reference to our intentions and
convictions, we use the expression: 'We should never have dreamt of such a thing.' By this, it is true, we mean on the one hand that we consider
the region of dreams the last and remotest place in which we could be held responsible for our thoughts, because there these thoughts are so
loosely and incoherently connected with our real being that we can, after all, hardly regard them as our own; but inasmuch as we feel impelled
expressly to deny the existence of such thoughts even in this region, we are at the same time indirectly admitting that our justification would not
be complete unless it extended even thus far. And I believe that here, although unconsciously, we are speaking the language of truth."
(p. 52): "No dream-action can be imagined whose first beginnings have not in some shape already passed through the mind during our waking
hours, in the form of wish, desire, or impulse." Concerning this original impulse we must say: The dream has not discovered it - it has only
imitated and extended it; it has only elaborated into dramatic form a scrap of historical material which it found already existing within us; it
brings to our mind the words of the Apostle that he who hates his brother is a murderer. And though, after we wake, being conscious of our moral
strength, we may smile at the whole widely elaborated structure of the depraved dream, yet the original material out of which we formed it cannot
be laughed away. One feels responsible for the transgressions of one's dreaming self; not for the whole sum of them, but yet for a certain
percentage. "In short, if in this sense, which can hardly be impugned, we understand the words of Christ, that out of the heart come evil thoughts,
then we can hardly help being convinced that every sin committed in our dreams brings with it at least a vague minimum of guilt." 
Thus Hildebrandt finds the source of the immorality of dreams in the germs and hints of evil impulses which pass through our minds during the
day as mental temptations, and he does not hesitate to include these immoral elements in the ethical evaluation of the personality. These same
thoughts, and the same evaluation of these thoughts, have, as we know, caused devout and holy men of all ages to lament that they were wicked
sinners.[46]
The general occurrence of these contrasting thoughts in the majority of men, and even in other regions than the ethical, is of course established
beyond a doubt. They have sometimes been judged in a less serious spirit. Spitta quotes a relevant passage from A. Zeller (Article "Irre," in the
Allgemeine Encyklopadie der Wissenschaften, Ersch and Gruber, p. 144): "An intellect is rarely so happily organized as to be in full command of
itself at all times and seasons, and never to be disturbed in the lucid and constant processes of thought by ideas not merely unessential, but
absolutely grotesque and nonsensical; indeed, the greatest thinkers have had cause to complain of this dream-like, tormenting and distressing
rabble of ideas, which disturbs their profoundest contemplations and their most pious and earnest meditations."
A clearer light is thrown on the psychological meaning of these contrasting thoughts by a further observation of Hildebrandt's, to the effect that
dreams permit us an occasional glimpse of the deepest and innermost recesses of our being, which are generally closed to us in our waking state
(p. 55). A recognition of this fact is betrayed by Kant in his Anthropology, when he states that our dreams may perhaps be intended to reveal to us
not what we are but what we might have been if we had had another upbringing; and by Radestock (p. 84), who suggests that dreams disclose to
us what we do not wish to admit to ourselves, and that we therefore unjustly condemn them as lying and deceptive. J. E. Erdmann asserts: "A
dream has never told me what I ought to think of a person, but, to my great surprise, a dream has more than once taught me what I do really think
of him and feel about him." And J. H. Fichte expresses himself in a like manner: "The character of our dreams gives a far truer reflection of our
general disposition than anything that we can learn by self-observation in the waking state." Such remarks as this of Benini's call our attention to
the fact that the emergence of impulses which are foreign to our ethical consciousness is merely analogous to the manner, already familiar to us,
in which the dream disposes of other representative material: "Certe nostre inclinazioni che si credevano soffocate e spente da un pezzo, si
ridestano; passioni vecchie e sepolte revivono; cose e persone a cui non pensiamo mai, ci vengono dinanzi" (p. 149). Volkelt expresses himself in
a similar fashion: "Even ideas which have entered into our consciousness almost unnoticed, and which, perhaps, it has never before called out of
oblivion, often announce their presence in the mind through a dream" (p 105). Finally, we may remember that according to Schleiermacher the
state of falling asleep is accompanied by the appearance of undesired imaginings.
We may include in such "undesired imaginings" the whole of that imaginative material the occurrence of which surprises us in immoral as well as
in absurd dreams. The only important difference consists in the fact that the undesired imaginings in the moral sphere are in opposition to our
usual feelings, whereas the others merely appear strange to us. So far nothing has been done to enable us to reconcile this difference by a
profounder understanding. But what is the significance of the emergence of undesired representations in dreams? What conclusions can the
psychology of the waking and dreaming mind draw from these nocturnal manifestations of contrasting ethical impulses? Here we find a fresh
diversity of opinion, and also a different grouping of the authors who have treated of the subject. The line of thought followed by Hildebrandt,
and by others who share his fundamental opinion, cannot be continued otherwise than by ascribing to the immoral impulses, even in the waking
state, a latent vitality, which is indeed inhibited from proceeding to action, and by asserting that during sleep something falls away from us which,
having the effect of an inhibition, has kept us from becoming aware of the existence of such impulses. Dreams therefore, reveal the true, if not the
whole, nature of the dreamer, and are one means of making the hidden life of the psyche accessible to our understanding. It is only on such
hypotheses that Hildebrandt can attribute to the dream the role of a monitor who calls our attention to the secret mischief in the soul, just as,
according to the physicians, it may announce a hitherto unobserved physical disorder. Spitta, too, must be influenced by this conception when he
refers, for example, to the stream of excitations which flow in upon the psyche during puberty, and consoles the dreamer by assuring him that he
has done all that is in his power to do if he has led a strictly virtuous life during his waking state, if he has made an effort to suppress the sinful
thoughts as often as they arise, and has kept them from maturing and turning into action. According to this conception, we might designate as
"undesired imaginings" those that are suppressed during the day, and we must recognize in their emergence a genuine psychic phenomenon.
According to certain other authors, we have no right to draw this last inference. For Jessen (p. 360) the undesired ideas and images, in the dream
as in the waking state, and also in the delirium of fever, etc., possess "the character of a voluntary activity laid to rest, and of a procession, to
some extent mechanical, of images and ideas evoked by inner impulses." An immoral dream proves nothing in respect of the psychic life of the
dreamer except that he has somehow become cognizant of the imaginative content in question; it is certainly no proof of a psychic impulse of his
own mind. Another writer, Maury, makes us wonder whether he, too, does not ascribe to the dream-state the power of dividing the psychic
activity into its components, instead of aimlessly destroying it. He speaks as follows of dreams in which one oversteps the bounds of morality:
"Ce sont nos penchants qui parlent et qui nous font agir, sans que la conscience nous retienne, bien que parfois elle nous avertisse. J'ai mes
defauts et mes penchants vicieux; a l'etat de veille, je tache de lutter contre eux, et il m'arrive assez souvent de n'y pas succomber. Mais dans mes
songes j'y succombe toujours, ou pour mieux dire j'agis par leur impulsion, sans crainte et sans remords.... Evidemment les visions qui se
deroulent devant ma pensee, et qui constituent le reve, me sont suggerees par les incitations que je ressens et que ma volonte absente ne cherche
pas a refouler."[47] Le Sommeil (p. 113).
If one believed in the power of the dream to reveal an actually existing, but suppressed or concealed, immoral disposition of the dreamer, one
could not express one's opinion more emphatically than in the words of Maury (p. 115): "En reve l'homme se revele donc tout entier a soi-meme
dans sa nudite et sa misere natives. Des qu'il suspend l'exercise de sa volonte, il devient le jouet de toutes les passions contre lesquelles, a l'etat de
veille, la conscience, le sentiment d'honneur, la crainte nous defendent."[48] In another place makes the striking assertion (p. 462): "Dans le reve, 
c'est surtout l'homme instinctif que se revele.... L'homme revient pour ainsi dire l'etat de nature quand il reve; mais moins les idees acquises ont
penetre dans son esprit, plus 'les penchants en desaccord' avec elles conservent encore sur lui d'influence dans le rive."[49] He then mentions, as
an example, that his own dreams often reveal him as a victim of just those superstitions which he has most vigorously attacked in his writings.
The value of all these acute observations is, however, impaired in Maury's case, because he refuses to recognize in the phenomena which he has
so accurately observed anything more than a proof of the automatisme psychologique which in his own opinion dominates the dream-life. He
conceives this automatism as the complete opposite of psychic activity.
A passage in Stricker's Studien uber das Bewusstsein reads: "Dreams do not consist purely and simply of delusions; for example, if one is afraid
of robbers in a dream, the robbers indeed are imaginary, but the fear is real." Our attention is here called to the fact that the affective development
of a dream does not admit of the judgment which one bestows upon the rest of the dream-content, and the problem then arises: What part of the
psychic processes in a dream may be real? That is to say, what part of them may claim to be enrolled among the psychic processes of the waking
state?
G. Dream-Theories and the Function of the Dream
A statement concerning the dream which seeks to explain as many as possible of its observed characteristics from a single point of view, and
which at the same time defines the relation of the dream to a more comprehensive sphere of phenomena, may be described as a theory of the
dream. The individual theories of the dream will be distinguished from one another by their designating as essential this or that characteristic of
dreams, and relating thereto their data and their explanations. It is not absolutely necessary that we should deduce from the theory of the dream a
function, i.e., a use or any such similar role, but expectation, being as a matter of habit teleologically inclined, will nevertheless welcome those
theories which afford us some insight into a function of dreams.
We have already become acquainted with many conceptions of the dream, which in this sense are more or less deserving of the name of dreamtheories. The belief of the ancients that dreams were sent by the gods in order to guide the actions of man was a complete theory of the dream,
which told them all that was worth knowing about dreams. Since dreams have become an object of biological research we have a greater number
of theories, some of which, however, are very incomplete.
Provided we make no claim to completeness, we might venture on the following rough grouping of dream-theories, based on their fundamental
conception of the degree and mode of the psychic activity in dreams:
1. Theories, like those of Delboeuf, which allow the full psychic activity of the waking state to continue in our dreams. Here the psyche does not
sleep; its apparatus remains intact; but under the conditions of the sleeping state, which differ from those of the waking state, it must in its normal
functioning give results which differ from those of the waking state. As regards these theories, it may be questioned whether their authors are in a
position to derive the distinction between dreaming and waking thought entirely from the conditions of the sleeping state. Moreover, they lack
one possible access to a function of dreams; one does not understand to what purpose one dreams - why the complicated mechanism of the
psychic apparatus should continue to operate even when it is placed under conditions to which it does not appear to be adapted. There are only
two purposeful reactions in the place of the reaction of dreaming: to sleep dreamlessly, or to wake when affected by disturbing stimuli.
2. Theories which, on the contrary, assume for the dream a diminution of the psychic activity, a loosening of connections, and an impoverishment
of the available material. In accordance with these theories, one must assume for sleep a psychological character entirely different from that given
by Delboeuf. Sleep encroaches widely upon the psyche; it does not consist in the mere shutting it off from the outer world; on the contrary, it
enters into its mechanism, and makes it for the time being unserviceable. If I may draw a comparison from psychiatry, I would say that the first
group of theories construes the dream like a paranoia, while the second represents it as a type of mental deficiency or amentia.
The theory that only a fragment of the psychic activity paralysed by sleep finds expression in dreams is that by far the most favoured by medical
writers, and by scientists in general. In so far as one may presuppose a general interest in dream-interpretation, one may indeed describe it as the
most popular theory of dreams. It is remarkable how nimbly this particular theory avoids the greatest danger that threatens every dreaminterpretation; that is, shipwreck on one of the contrasts incorporated in dreams. Since this theory regards dreams as the result of a partial waking
(or, as Herbart puts it in his Psychologie uber den Traum, "a gradual, partial, and at the same time very anomalous waking"), it is able to cover thewhole series, from the inferior activities of dreams, which betray themselves by their absurdity, to fully concentrated intellectual activity, by a
series of states of progressive awakening, ending in complete wakefulness.
Those who find the physiological mode of expression indispensable, or who deem it more scientific, will find this theory of dreams summarized
in Binz's description (p. 43):
"This state (of torpor), however, gradually comes to an end in the hours of early morning. The accumulated products of fatigue in the albumen of
the brain gradually diminish. They are slowly decomposed, or carried away by the constantly flowing blood-stream. Here and there individual
groups of cells can be distinguished as being awake, while around them all is still in a state of torpidity. The isolated work of the individual 
groups now appears before our clouded consciousness, which is still powerless to control other parts of the brain, which govern the associations.
Hence the pictures created, which for the most part correspond to the objective impressions of the immediate past, combine with one another in a
wild and uncontrolled fashion. As the number of brain-cells set free constantly increases, the irrationality of the dream becomes constantly less."
The conception of the dream as an incomplete, partial waking state, or traces of the influence of this conception, will of course be found in the
works of all the modern physiologists and philosophers. It is most completely represented by Maury. It often seems as though this author
conceives the state of being awake or asleep as susceptible of shifting from one anatomical region to another; each anatomical region seeming to
him to be connected with a definite psychic function. Here I will merely suggest that even if the theory of partial waking were confirmed, its finer
superstructure would still call for exhaustive consideration.
No function of dreams, of course, can emerge from this conception of the dream-life. On the contrary, Binz, one of the chief proponents of this
theory, consistently enough denies that dreams have any status or importance. He says (p. 357): "All the facts, as we see them, urge us to
characterize the dream as a physical process, in all cases useless, and in many cases definitely morbid."
The expression physical in reference to dreams (the word is emphasized by the author) points, of course, in more than one direction. In the first
place, it refers to the aetiology of dreams, which was of special interest to Binz, as he was studying the experimental production of dreams by the
administration of drugs. It is certainly in keeping with this kind of dream-theory to ascribe the incitement to dreaming, whenever possible,
exclusively to somatic origins. Presented in the most extreme form the theory is as follows: After we have put ourselves to sleep by the
banishment of stimuli, there would be no need to dream, and no reason for dreaming until the morning, when the gradual awakening through the
fresh invasion of stimuli might be reflected in the phenomenon of dreaming. But, as a matter of fact, it is not possible to protect our sleep from
stimuli; like the germs of life of which Mephistopheles complained, stimuli come to the sleeper from all directions - from without, from within,
and even from all those bodily regions which never trouble us during the waking state. Thus our sleep is disturbed; now this, now that little corner
of the psyche is jogged into the waking state, and the psyche functions for a while with the awakened fraction, yet is thankful to fall asleep again.
The dream is the reaction to the disturbance of sleep caused by the stimulus, but it is, when all is said, a purely superfluous reaction.
The description of the dream - which, after all, remains an activity of the psychic organ - as a physical process has yet another connotation. So to
describe it is to deny that the dream has the dignity of a psychic process. The old simile of "the ten fingers of a person ignorant of music running
over the keyboard of an instrument" perhaps best illustrates in what esteem the dream is commonly held by the representatives of exact science.
Thus conceived, it becomes something wholly insusceptible of interpretation. How could the ten fingers of a player ignorant of music perform a
musical composition?
The theory of partial wakefulness did not escape criticism even by the earlier writers. Thus Burdach wrote in 1830: "If we say that dreaming is a
partial waking, then, in the first place, neither the waking nor the sleeping state is explained thereby; secondly, this amounts only to saying that
certain powers of the mind are active in dreams while others are at rest. But such irregularities occur throughout life..." (p. 482).
The prevailing dream-theory which conceives the dream as a "physical" process finds a certain support in a very interesting conception of the
dream which was first propounded by Robert in 1866, and which is seductive because it assigns to the dream a function or a useful result. As the
basis of his theory Robert takes two objectively observable facts which we have already discussed in our consideration of dream-material (chapter
I., B). These facts are: (1) that one very often dreams about the most insignificant impressions of the day; and (2) that one rarely carries over into
the dream the absorbing interests of the day. Robert asserts as an indisputable fact that those matters which have been fully settled and solved
never evoke dreams, but only such as lie incompleted in the mind, or touch it merely in passing (p. 10). "For this reason we cannot usually explain
our dreams, since their causes are to be found in sensory impressions of the preceding day which have not attained sufficient recognition on the
part of the dreamer." The condition permitting an impression to reach the dream is, therefore, that this impression has been disturbed in its
elaboration, or that it was too insignificant to lay claim to such elaboration.
Robert therefore conceives the dream "as a physical process of elimination which in its psychic reaction reaches the consciousness." Dreams are
eliminations of thoughts nipped in the bud. "A man deprived of the capacity for dreaming would in time become mentally unbalanced, because an
immense number of unfinished and unsolved thoughts and superficial impressions would accumulate in his brain, under the pressure of which all
that should be incorporated in the memory as a completed whole would be stifled." The dream acts as a safety-valve for the over-burdened brain.
Dreams possess a healing and unburdening power (p. 32).
We should misunderstand Robert if we were to ask him how representation in the dream could bring about an unburdening of the mind. The
writer apparently concluded from these two peculiarities of the dream-material that during sleep such an elimination of worthless impressions is
effected somehow as a somatic process; and that dreaming is not a special psychic process, but only the information which we receive of such
elimination. Moreover, elimination is not the only thing that takes place in the mind during sleep. Robert himself adds that the stimuli of the day
are likewise elaborated, and "what cannot be eliminated from the undigested thought-material lying in the mind is bound up into a completed
whole by mental clues borrowed from the imagination, and is thus enrolled in the memory as a harmless phantasy-picture" (p. 23).
But it is in his criticism of the sources of dreams that Robert is most flatly opposed to the prevailing theory. Whereas according to this theory
there would be no dream if the external and internal sensory stimuli did not repeatedly wake the mind, according to Robert the impulse to dream 
lies in the mind itself. It lies in the overloading of the mind, which demands discharge, and Robert considers, quite consistently, that those causes
conditioning the dream which depend on the physical condition assume a subordinate rank, and could not incite dreams in a mind which
contained no material for dream-formation derived from the waking consciousness. It is admitted, however, that the phantasy-images originating
in the depths of the mind may be influenced by nervous stimuli (p. 48). Thus, according to Robert, dreams are not, after all, wholly dependent on
the somatic element. Dreaming is, of course, not a psychic process, and it has no place among the psychic processes of the waking state; it is a
nocturnal somatic process in the apparatus of mental activity, and has a function to perform, viz., to guard this apparatus against excessive strain,
or, if we may be allowed to change the comparison, to cleanse the mind.
Another author, Yves Delage, bases his theory on the same characteristics of the dream-characteristics which are perceptible in the selection of
the dream-material, and it is instructive to observe how a trifling twist in the conception of the same things gives a final result entirely different in
its bearings. Delage, having lost through death a person very dear to him, found that we either do not dream at all of what occupies us intently
during the day, or that we begin to dream of it only after it is overshadowed by the other interests of the day. His investigations in respect of other
persons corroborated the universality of this state of affairs. Concerning the dreams of newly-married people, he makes a comment which is
admirable if it should prove to be generally true: "S'ils ont ete fortement epris, presque jamais ils n'ont reve l'un de l'autre avant le mariage ou
pendant la lune de miel; et s'ils ont reve d'amour c'est pour etre infideles avec quelque personne indifferente ou odieuse."[50] But of what does
one dream? Delage recognizes that the material of our dreams consists of fragments and remnants of impressions, both from the last few days and
from earlier periods. All that appears in our dreams, all that we may at first be inclined to consider the creation of the dream-life, proves on closer
investigation to be unrecognized reproduction, "souvenir inconscient." But this representative material reveals one common characteristic; it
originates from impressions which have probably affected our senses more forcibly than our mind, or from which the attention has been deflected
soon after their occurrence. The less conscious, and at the same time the stronger an impression, the greater the prospect of its playing a part in
our next dream.
These two categories of impressions - the insignificant and the undisposed-of - are essentially the same as those which were emphasized by
Robert, but Delage gives them another significance, inasmuch as he believes that these impressions are capable of exciting dreams not because
they are indifferent, but because they are not disposed of. The insignificant impressions also are, in a sense, not fully disposed of; they, too, owing
to their character of new impressions, are "autant de ressorts tendus,"[51] which will be relaxed during sleep. Still more entitled to a role in the
dream than a weak and almost unnoticed impression is a vivid impression which has been accidentally retarded in its elaboration, or intentionally
repressed. The psychic energy accumulated during the day by inhibition or suppression becomes the mainspring of the dream at night. In dreams
psychically suppressed material achieves expression.[52]
Unfortunately Delage does not pursue this line of thought any farther; he is able to ascribe only the most insignificant role in our dreams to an
independent psychic activity, and thus, in his theory of dreams, he reverts to the prevailing doctrine of a partial slumber of the brain: "En somme
le reve est le produit de la pensee errante, sans but et sans direction, se fixant successivement sur les souvenirs, qui ont garde assez d'intensite
pour se placer sur sa route et l'arreter au passage, etablissant entre eux un lien tantot faible et indecis, tantot plus fort et plus serre, selon que
l'activite actuelle du cerveau est plus ou moins abolie par le sommeil."[53]
3. In a third group we may include those dream-theories which ascribe to the dreaming mind the capacity for and propensity to special psychic
activities, which in the waking state it is able to exert either not at all or imperfectly. In most cases the manifestation of these activities is held to
result in a useful function of dreams. The evaluations of dreams by the earlier psychologists fall chiefly within this category. I shall content
myself, however, with quoting in their stead the assertion of Burdach, to the effect that dreaming "is the natural activity of the mind, which is not
limited by the power of the individuality, nor disturbed by self-consciousness, nor directed by self-determination, but is the vitality of the sensible
focus indulging in free play" (p. 486).
Burdach and others evidently consider this revelling in the free use of its own powers as a state in which the mind refreshes itself and gathers
fresh strength for the day's work; something, indeed, after the fashion of a vacation. Burdach therefore cites with approval the admirable words in
which the poet Novalis lauds the power of the dream: "The dream is a bulwark against the regularity and commonplace character of life, a free
recreation of the fettered phantasy, in which it intermingles all the images of life and interrupts the constant seriousness of the adult by the joyful
play of the child. Without the dream we should surely grow old earlier, so that the dream may be considered, if not precisely as a gift from above,
yet as a delightful exercise, a friendly companion on our pilgrimage to the grave."
The refreshing and healing activity of dreams is even more impressively described by Purkinje (p. 456). "The productive dreams in particular
would perform these functions. These are the unconstrained play of the imagination, and have no connection with the events of the day. The mind
is loth to continue the tension of the waking life, but wishes to relax it and recuperate from it. It creates, in the first place conditions opposed to
those of the waking state. It cures sadness by joy, worry by hope and cheerfully distracting images, hatred by love and friendliness, and fear by
courage and confidence; it appeases doubt by conviction and firm belief, and vain expectation by realization. Sleep heals many sore spots in the
mind, which the day keeps continually open, by covering them and guarding them against fresh irritation. On this depends in some degree the
consoling action of time." We all feel that sleep is beneficial to the psychic life, and the vague surmise of the popular consciousness is apparently
loth to surrender the notion that dreaming is one of the ways in which sleep bestows its benefits. 
The most original and most comprehensive attempt to explain dreaming as a special activity of the mind, which can freely unfold itself only in the
sleeping state, is that made by Scherner in 1861. Scherner's book is written in a heavy and bombastic style and is inspired by an almost
intoxicated enthusiasm for the subject, which is bound to repel us unless it can carry us away with it. It places so many difficulties in the way of
an analysis that we gladly resort to the clearer and conciser presentation of Scherner's theories made by the philosopher Volkelt: "From these
mystical conglomerations, from all these outbursts of splendour and radiance, there indeed flashes and shines an ominous semblance of meaning;
but the path of the philosopher is not illumined thereby." Such is the criticism of Scherner's exposition by one of his own followers.
Scherner is not one of those writers for whom the mind carries its undiminished faculties into the dream-life. He even explains how, in our
dreams, the centrality and spontaneous energy of the ego become enervated; how cognition, feeling, will, and imagination are transformed by this
decentralization; how the remnant of these psychic forces has not a truly intellectual character, but is rather of the nature of a mechanism. But, on
the other hand, that activity of the psyche which may be described as phantasy, freed from all rational governance, and hence no longer strictly
controlled, rises to absolute supremacy in our dreams. To be sure, it borrows all its building-material from the memory of the waking state, but
with this material it builds up structures which differ from those of the waking state as day differs from night. In our dreams it reveals itself as not
only reproductive but also productive. Its peculiarities give the dream-life its singular character. It shows a preference for the unlimited, the
exaggerated, the prodigious; but by its liberation from the inhibiting categories of thought, it gains a greater flexibility and agility, and indulges in
pleasurable turns. It is excessively sensitive to the delicate emotional stimuli of the mind, to its stirring and disturbing affects, and it rapidly
recasts the inner life into an external, plastic visibility. The dream-phantasy lacks the language of concepts. What it wishes to say it must express
in visible form; and since in this case the concept does not exert an inhibitory control, it depicts it in all the fulness, power, and breadth of visible
form. But hereby its language, plain though it is, becomes cumbersome, awkward, and prolix. Plain speaking is rendered especially difficult by
the fact that it dislikes expressing an object by its actual image, but prefers to select an alien image, if only the latter is able to express that
particular aspect of the object which it is anxious to represent. Such is the symbolizing activity of the phantasy.... It is, moreover, very significant
that the dream-phantasy reproduces objects not in detail, but only in outline, and in the freest possible manner. Its paintings, therefore, are like
light and brilliant sketches. The dream-phantasy, however, does not stop at the mere representation of the object, but feels an internal urge to
implicate the dream-ego to some extent with the object, and thus to give rise to action. The visual dream, for example, depicts gold coins lying in
the street; the dreamer picks them up, rejoices, and carries them away.
According to Scherner, the material upon which the dream-phantasy exerts its artistic activity consists preponderantly of the organic sensory
stimuli which are so obscure during the day (cf. p. 151 above); hence it is that the over-fantastic theory of Scherner, and perhaps too matter-offact theories of Wundt and other physiologists, though otherwise diametrically opposed to each other, are in perfect agreement in their
assumptions with regard to dream-sources and dream-stimuli. But whereas, according to the physiological theory, the psychic reaction to the
inner physical stimuli becomes exhausted with the arousing of any of the ideas appropriate to these stimuli (as these ideas then, by way of
association, call to their aid other ideas, so that on reaching this stage the chain of psychic processes appears to terminate), according to Scherner,on the other hand, the physical stimuli merely supply the psyche with material which it may utilize in fulfilling its phantastic intentions. For
Scherner dream-formation begins where, according to the views of other writers, it comes to an end.
What the dream-phantasy does with the physical stimuli cannot, of course, be regarded as purposeful. The phantasy plays a tantalizing game with
them, and represents the organic source of the stimuli of the dream in question by any sort of plastic symbolism. Indeed, Scherner holds - though
here Volkelt and others differ from him - that the dream-phantasy has a certain favourite symbol for the organism as a whole: namely, the house.
Fortunately, however, for its representations, it does not seem to limit itself to this material; it may also employ a whole series of houses to
designate a single organ; for example, very long streets of houses for the intestinal stimulus. In other dreams particular parts of the house may
actually represent particular regions of the body, as in the headache-dream, when the ceiling of the room (which the dream sees covered with
disgusting toad-like spiders) represents the head.
Quite apart from the symbol of the house, any other suitable object may be employed to represent those parts of the body which excite the dream.
"Thus the breathing lungs find their symbol in the flaming stove with its windy roaring, the heart in hollow chests and baskets, the bladder in
round, ball-shaped, or simply hollow objects. The man's dreams, when due to the sexual stimulus, make the dreamer find in the street the upper
portion of a clarinet, or the mouthpiece of a tobacco-pipe, or, again, a piece of fur. The clarinet and tobacco-pipe represent the approximate form
of the male sexual organ, while the fur represents the pubic hair. In the sexual dreams of the female, the tightness of the closed thighs may be
symbolized by a narrow courtyard surrounded by houses, and the vagina by a very narrow, slippery and soft footpath, leading through the
courtyard, upon which the dreamer is obliged to walk, in order perhaps to carry a letter to a man" (Volkelt, p. 39). It is particularly noteworthy
that at the end of such a physically stimulated dream the phantasy, as it were, unmasks itself by representing the exciting organ or its function
unconcealed. Thus the "tooth-excited dream" usually ends with the dreamer taking a tooth out of his mouth.
The dream-phantasy may, however, direct its attention not merely to the form of the exciting organ, but may even make the substance contained
therein the object of symbolization. Thus, for example, the dream excited by the intestinal stimuli may lead us through muddy streets, the dream
due to stimuli from the bladder to foaming water. Or the stimulus as such, the nature of its excitation, and the object which it covets, are
represented symbolically. Or, again, the dream-ego enters into a concrete association with the symbolization of its own state; as, for example,
when in the case of painful stimuli we struggle desperately with vicious dogs or raging bulls, or when in a sexual dream the dreamer sees herself
pursued by a naked man. Disregarding all the possible prolixity of elaboration, a phantastic symbolizing activity remains as the central force of
every dream. Volkelt, in his fine and enthusiastic essay, attempted to penetrate still further into the character of this phantasy, and to assign to the 
psychic activity thus recognized its position in a system of philosophical ideas, which, however, remains altogether too difficult of comprehension
for anyone who is not prepared by previous training for the intuitive comprehension of philosophical modes of thought.
Scherner attributes no useful function to the activity of the symbolizing phantasy in dreams. In dreams the psyche plays with the stimuli which are
offered to it. One might conjecture that it plays in a mischievous fashion. And we might be asked whether our detailed consideration of Scherner's
dream-theory, the arbitrariness of which, and its deviation from the rules of all forms of research are only too obvious, can lead to any useful
results. We might fitly reply that to reject Scherner's theory without previous examination would be imposing too arrogant a veto. This theory is
based on the impressions produced by his dreams on a man who paid close attention to them, and who would appear to be personally very well
equipped for tracing obscure psychic phenomena. Furthermore, it treats of a subject which (though rich in its contents and relations) has for
thousands of years appeared mysterious to humanity, and to the elucidation of which science, strictly so called, has, as it confesses, contributed
nothing beyond attempting - in uncompromising opposition to popular sentiment - to deny its content and significance. Finally, let us frankly
admit that it seems as though we cannot very well avoid the phantastical in our attempts to explain dreams. We must remember also that there is
such a thing as a phantasy of ganglion cells; the passage cited (p. 87) from a sober and exact investigator like Binz, which describes how the dawn
of awakening floods the dormant cell-masses of the cerebral cortex, is not a whit less fanciful and improbable than Scherner's attempts at
interpretation. I hope to be able to demonstrate that there is something real underlying these attempts, though the phenomena which he describes
have been only vaguely recognized, and do not possess the character of universality that should entitle them to be the basis of a theory of dreams.
For the present, Scherner's theory of dreams, in contrast to the medical theory, may perhaps lead us to realize between what extremes the
explanation of dream-life is still unsteadily vacillating.
H. The Relation between Dreams and Mental Diseases
When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental derangement, we may mean three different things: (1) aetiological and clinical relations, as
when a dream represents or initiates a psychotic condition, or occurs subsequently to such a condition; (2) changes which the dream-life
undergoes in cases of mental disease; (3) inner relations between dreams and psychoses, analogies which point to an intimate relationship. These
manifold relations between the two series of phenomena were in the early days of medical science - and are once more at the present time - a
favourite theme of medical writers, as we may learn from the literature on the subject collated by Spitta, Radestock, Maury, and Tissie. Recently
Sante de Sanctis has directed his attention to this relationship.[54] For the purposes of our discussion it will suffice merely to glance at this
important subject.
As to the clinical and aetiological relations between dreams and the psychoses, I will report the following observations as examples: Hohnbaum
asserts (see Krauss) that the first attack of insanity is frequently connected with a terrifying anxiety-dream, and that the predominating idea is
related to this dream. Sante de Sanctis adduces similar observations in respect of paranoiacs, and declares the dream to be, in some of them, "la
vraie cause determinante de la folie."[55] The psychosis may come to life quite suddenly, simultaneously with the dream that contains its
effective and delusive explanation, or it may develop slowly through subsequent dreams that have still to struggle against doubt. In one of de
Sanctis's cases an intensively moving dream was accompanied by slight hysterical attacks, which, in their turn, were followed by an anxious
melancholic state. Fere (cited by Tissie) refers to a dream which was followed by hysterical paralysis. Here the dream is presented as the
aetiology of mental derangement, although we should be making a statement equally consistent with the facts were we to say that the first
manifestation of the mental derangement occurred in the dream-life, that the disorder first broke through in the dream. In other instances, the
morbid symptoms are included in the dream-life, or the psychosis remains confined to the dream-life. Thus Thomayer calls our attention to
anxiety-dreams which must be conceived as the equivalent of epileptic attacks. Allison has described cases of nocturnal insanity (see Radestock),
in which the subjects are apparently perfectly well in the day-time, while hallucinations, fits of frenzy, and the like regularly make their
appearance at night. De Sanctis and Tissie record similar observations (the equivalent of a paranoic dream in an alcoholic, voices accusing a wife
of infidelity). Tissie records many observations of recent date in which behaviour of a pathological character (based on delusory hypotheses,
obsessive impulses) had their origin in dreams. Guislain describes a case in which sleep was replaced by an intermittent insanity.
We cannot doubt that one day the physician will concern himself not only with the psychology, but also with the psycho-pathology of dreams.
In cases of convalescence from insanity, it is often especially obvious that while the functions may be healthy by day the dream-life may still
partake of the psychosis. Gregory is said to have been the first to call attention to such cases (see Krauss). Macario (cited by Tissie) gives an
account of a maniac who, a week after his complete recovery, once more experienced in dreams the flux of ideas and the unbridled impulses of
his disease.
Concerning the changes which the dream-life undergoes in chronic psychotics, little research has been undertaken as yet. On the other hand, early
attention was given to the inner relationship between dreams and mental disturbances, a relationship which is demonstrated by the complete
agreement of the manifestations occurring in each. According to Maury, Cabanis, in his Rapports du Physique et du Moral, was the first to call
attention to this relationship; he was followed by Lelut, J. Moreau, and more particularly the philosopher Maine de Biran. The comparison
between the two is of course older still. Radestock begins the chapter in which he deals with the subject by citing a number of opinions which
insist on the analogy between insanity and dreaming. Kant says somewhere: "The lunatic is a dreamer in the waking state." According to Krauss,
"Insanity is a dream in which the senses are awake." Schopenhauer terms the dream a brief insanity, and insanity a long dream. Hagen describes
delirium as a dream-life which is inducted not by sleep but by disease. Wundt, in his Physiologische Psychologie, declares: "As a matter of fact 
we ourselves may in dreams experience almost all the manifestations which we observe in the asylums for the insane."
The specific points of agreement in consequence of which such a comparison commends itself to our judgment are enumerated by Spitta, who
groups them (very much as Maury has done) as follows: "(1) Suspension, or at least retardation of self-consciousness, and consequently ignorance
of the condition as such, the impossibility of astonishment, and a lack of moral consciousness. (2) Modified perception of the sensory organs; that
is, perception is as a rule diminished in dreams, and greatly enhanced in insanity. (3) Mutual combination of ideas exclusively in accordance with
the laws of association and reproduction, hence automatic series-formations: hence again a lack of proportion in the relations between ideas
(exaggerations, phantasms); and the results of all this: (4) Changes in - for example, inversions of - the personality, and sometimes of the
idiosyncrasies of the character (perversities)."
Radestock adds a few additional data concerning the analogous nature of the material of dreams and of mental derangement: "The greatest
number of hallucinations and illusions are found in the sphere of the senses of sight and hearing and general sensation. As in dreams, the fewest
elements are supplied by the senses of smell and taste. The fever-patient, like the dreamer, is assailed by reminiscences from the remote past;
what the waking and healthy man seems to have forgotten is recollected in sleep and in disease." The analogy between dreams and the psychoses
receives its full value only when, like a family resemblance, it is extended to the subtler points of mimicry, and even the individual peculiarities
of facial expression.
"To him who is tortured by physical and mental sufferings the dream accords what has been denied him by reality, to wit, physical well-being,
and happiness; so, too, the insane see radiant images of happiness, eminence, and wealth. The supposed possession of estates and the imaginary
fulfilment of wishes, the denial or destruction of which have actually been a psychic cause of the insanity, often form the main content of the
delirium. The woman who has lost a dearly beloved child experiences in her delirium the joys of maternity; the man who has suffered reverses of
fortune deems himself immensely wealthy; and the jilted girl sees herself tenderly beloved."
(This passage from Radestock is an abstract of a brilliant exposition of Griesinger's (p. 111), which reveals, with the greatest clarity, wishfulfilment as a characteristic of the imagination common to dreams and to the psychoses. My own investigations have taught me that here is to be
found the key to a psychological theory of dreams and of the psychoses.)
"Absurd combinations of ideas and weakness of judgment are the main characteristics of the dream and of insanity." The over-estimation of one's
own mental capacity, which appears absurd to sober judgment, is found alike in both, and the rapid flux of imaginings in the dream corresponds
to the flux of ideas in the psychoses. Both are devoid of any measure of time. The splitting of the personality in dreams, which, for instance,
distributes one's own knowledge between two persons, one of whom, the strange person, corrects one's own ego in the dream, entirely
corresponds with the well-known splitting of the personality in hallucinatory paranoia; the dreamer, too, hears his own thoughts expressed by
strange voices. Even the constant delusive ideas find their analogy in the stereotyped and recurring pathological dream (reve obsedant). After
recovering from delirium, patients not infrequently declare that the whole period of their illness appeared to them like an uncomfortable dream;
indeed, they inform us that sometimes during their illness they have suspected that they were only dreaming, just as often happens in the sleepdream.
In view of all this, it is not surprising that Radestock should summarize his own opinion, and that of many others, in the following words:
"Insanity, an abnormal morbid phenomenon, is to be regarded as an enhancement of the periodically recurring normal dream-state" (p. 228).
Krauss attempted to base the relationship between the dream and insanity upon their aetiology (or rather upon the sources of excitation), thus,
perhaps, making the relationship even more intimate than was possible on the basis of the analogous nature of the phenomena manifested.
According to him, the fundamental element common to both is, as we have already learned, the organically conditioned sensation, the sensation
of physical stimuli, the general sensation arising out of contributions from all the organs (cf. Peisse, cited by Maury, p. 52).
The undeniable agreement between dreams and mental derangement, extending even to characteristic details, constitutes one of the strongest
confirmations of the medical theory of dream-life, according to which the dream is represented as a useless and disturbing process, and as the
expression of a diminished psychic activity. One cannot expect, for the present, to derive the final explanation of the dream from the psychic
derangements, since, as is well known, our understanding of the origin of the latter is still highly unsatisfactory. It is very probable, however, that
a modified conception of the dream must also influence our views regarding the inner mechanism of mental disorders, and hence we may say that
we are working towards the explanation of the psychoses when we endeavour to elucidate the mystery of dreams. 

I shall have to justify myself for not extending my summary of the literature of dream-problems to cover the period between the first appearance
of this book and the publication of the second edition. This justification may not seem very satisfactory to the reader; none the less, to me it was
decisive. The motives which induced me to summarize the treatment of dreams in the literature of the subject have been exhausted by the 
foregoing introduction; to have continued this would have cost me a great deal of effort and would not have been particularly useful or
instructive. For the interval in question - a period of nine years - has yielded nothing new or valuable as regards the conception of dreams, either
in actual material or in novel points of view. In most of the literature which has appeared since the publication of my own work the latter has not
been mentioned or discussed; it has, of course, received the least attention from the so-called "research-workers on dreams," who have thus
afforded a brilliant example of the aversion to learning anything new so characteristic of the scientist. "Les savants ne sont pas curieux,"[56] said
the scoffer Anatole France. If there were such a thing in science as the right of revenge, I in my turn should be justified in ignoring the literature
which has appeared since the publication of this book. The few reviews which have appeared in the scientific journals are so full of
misconceptions and lack of comprehension that my only possible answer to my critics would be a request that they should read this book over
again - or perhaps merely that they should read it!
In the works of those physicians who make use of the psycho-analytic method of treatment a great many dreams have been recorded and
interpreted in accordance with my directions. In so far as these works go beyond the confirmation of my own assertions, I have noted their results
in the context of my exposition. A supplementary bibliography at the end of this volume comprises the most important of these new publications.
The comprehensive work on the dream by Sante de Sanctis, of which a German translation appeared soon after its publication, was produced
simultaneously with my own, so that I could not review his results, nor could he comment upon mine. I am sorry to have to express the opinion
that this laborious work is exceedingly poor in ideas, so poor that one could never divine from it the possibility of the problems which I have
treated in these pages.
I can think of only two publications which touch on my own treatment of the dream-problems. A young philosopher, H. Swoboda, who has
ventured to extend W. Fliess's discovery of biological periodicity (in series of twenty-three and twenty-eight days) to the psychic field, has
produced an imaginative essay,[57] in which, among other things, he has used this key to solve the riddle of dreams. Such a solution, however,
would be an inadequate estimate of the significance of dreams. The material content of dreams would be explained by the coincidence of all those
memories which, on the night of the dream, complete one of these biological periods for the first or the nth time. A personal communication of
the author's led me to assume that he himself no longer took this theory very seriously. But it seems that I was mistaken in this conclusion: I shall
record in another place some observations made with reference to Swoboda's thesis, which did not, however, yield convincing results. It gave me
far greater pleasure to find by chance, in an unexpected quarter, a conception of the dream which is in complete agreement with the essence of my
own. The relevant dates preclude the possibility that this conception was influenced by reading my book: I must therefore hail this as the only
demonstrable concurrence with the essentials of my theory of dreams to be found in the literature of the subject. The book which contains the
passage that I have in mind was published (in its second edition) in 1910, by Lynkeus, under the title Phantasien eines Realisten. 

The epigraph on the title-page of this volume indicates the tradition to which I prefer to ally myself in my conception of the dream. I am
proposing to show that dreams are capable of interpretation; and any contributions to the solution of the problems which have already been
discussed will emerge only as possible by-products in the accomplishment of my special task. On the hypothesis that dreams are susceptible of
interpretation, I at once find myself in disagreement with the prevailing doctrine of dreams - in fact, with all the theories of dreams, excepting
only that of Scherner, for to interpret a dream is to specify its meaning, to replace it by something which takes its position in the concatenation of
our psychic activities as a link of definite importance and value. But, as we have seen, the scientific theories of the dream leave no room for a
problem of dream-interpretation; since, in the first place, according to these theories, dreaming is not a psychic activity at all, but a somatic
process which makes itself known to the psychic apparatus by means of symbols. Lay opinion has always been opposed to these theories. It
asserts its privilege of proceeding illogically, and although it admits that dreams are incomprehensible and absurd, it cannot summon up the
courage to deny that dreams have any significance. Led by a dim intuition, it seems rather to assume that dreams have a meaning, albeit a hidden
one; that they are intended as a substitute for some other thought-process, and that we have only to disclose this substitute correctly in order to
discover the hidden meaning of the dream.
The unscientific world, therefore, has always endeavoured to interpret dreams, and by applying one or the other of two essentially different
methods. The first of these methods envisages the dream-content as a whole, and seeks to replace it by another content, which is intelligible and
in certain respects analogous. This is symbolic dream-interpretation; and of course it goes to pieces at the very outset in the case of those dreams
which are not only unintelligible but confused. The construction which the biblical Joseph placed upon the dream of Pharaoh furnishes an
example of this method. The seven fat kine, after which came seven lean ones that devoured the former, were a symbolic substitute for seven
years of famine in the land of Egypt, which according to the prediction were to consume all the surplus that seven fruitful years had produced.
Most of the artificial dreams contrived by the poets[1] are intended for some such symbolic interpretation, for they reproduce the thought
conceived by the poet in a guise not unlike the disguise which we are wont to find in our dreams.
The idea that the dream concerns itself chiefly with the future, whose form it surmises in advance - a relic of the prophetic significance with
which dreams were once invested - now becomes the motive for translating into the future the meaning of the dream which has been found by
means of symbolic interpretation.
A demonstration of the manner in which one arrives at such a symbolic interpretation cannot, of course, be given. Success remains a matter of
ingenious conjecture, of direct intuition, and for this reason dream-interpretation has naturally been elevated into an art which seems to depend
upon extraordinary gifts.[2] The second of the two popular methods of dream-interpretation entirely abandons such claims. It might be described
as the cipher method, since it treats the dream as a kind of secret code in which every sign is translated into another sign of known meaning,
according to an established key. For example, I have dreamt of a letter, and also of a funeral or the like; I consult a "dream-book," and I find that
"letter" is to be translated by "vexation" and "funeral" by "engagement." It now remains to establish a connection, which I am again to assume as
pertaining to the future, by means of the rigmarole which I have deciphered. An interesting variant of this cipher procedure, a variant in which its
character of purely mechanical transference is to a certain extent corrected, is presented in the work on dream-interpretation by Artemidoros of
Daldis.[3] Here not only the dream-content, but also the personality and social position of the dreamer are taken into consideration, so that the
same dream-content has a significance for the rich man, the married man, or the orator, which is different from that which applies to the poor
man, the bachelor, or, let us say, the merchant. The essential point, then, in this procedure is that the work of interpretation is not applied to the
entirety of the dream, but to each portion of the dream-content severally, as though the dream were a conglomerate in which each fragment calls
for special treatment. Incoherent and confused dreams are certainly those that have been responsible for the invention of the cipher method.[4]


The worthlessness of both these popular methods of interpretation does not admit of discussion. As regards the scientific treatment of the subject,
the symbolic method is limited in its application, and is not susceptible of a general exposition. In the cipher method everything depends upon
whether the key, the dream-book, is reliable, and for that all guarantees are lacking. So that one might be tempted to grant the contention of the
philosophers and psychiatrists, and to dismiss the problem of dream-interpretation as altogether fanciful.

I have, however, come to think differently. I have been forced to perceive that here, once more, we have one of those not infrequent cases where
an ancient and stubbornly retained popular belief seems to have come nearer to the truth of the matter than the opinion of modern science. I must
insist that the dream actually does possess a meaning, and that a scientific method of dream-interpretation is possible. I arrived at my knowledge
of this method in the following manner:
For years I have been occupied with the resolution of certain psycho-pathological structures - hysterical phobias, obsessional ideas, and the like -
with therapeutic intentions. I have been so occupied, in fact, ever since I heard the significant statement of Joseph Breuer, to the effect that in
these structures, regarded as morbid symptoms, solution and treatment go hand in hand.Where it has been possible to trace a pathological idea
back to those elements in the psychic life of the patient to which it owed its origin, this idea has crumbled away, and the patient has been relieved
of it. In view of the failure of our other therapeutic efforts, and in the face of the mysterious character of these pathological conditions, it seemed
to me tempting, in spite of all the difficulties, to follow the method initiated by Breuer until a complete elucidation of the subject had been 
achieved. I shall have occasion elsewhere to give a detailed account of the form which the technique of this procedure has finally assumed, and of
the results of my efforts. In the course of these psycho-analytic studies, I happened upon the question of dream-interpretation. My patients, after I
had pledged them to inform me of all the ideas and thoughts which occurred to them in connection with a given theme, related their dreams, and
thus taught me that a dream may be interpolated in the psychic concatenation, which may be followed backwards from a pathological idea into
the patient's memory. The next step was to treat the dream itself as a symptom, and to apply to it the method of interpretation which had been
worked out for such symptoms.
For this a certain psychic preparation on the part of the patient is necessary. A twofold effort is made, to stimulate his attentiveness in respect of
his psychic perceptions, and to eliminate the critical spirit in which he is ordinarily in the habit of viewing such thoughts as come to the surface.
For the purpose of self-observation with concentrated attention it is advantageous that the patient should take up a restful position and close his
eyes; he must be explicitly instructed to renounce all criticism of the thought-formations which he may perceive. He must also be told that the
success of the psycho-analysis depends upon his noting and communicating everything that passes through his mind, and that he must not allow
himself to suppress one idea because it seems to him unimportant or irrelevant to the subject, or another because it seems nonsensical. He must
preserve an absolute impartiality in respect to his ideas; for if he is unsuccessful in finding the desired solution of the dream, the obsessional idea,
or the like, it will be because he permits himself to be critical of them.
I have noticed in the course of my psycho-analytical work that the psychological state of a man in an attitude of reflection is entirely different
from that of a man who is observing his psychic processes. In reflection there is a greater play of psychic activity than in the most attentive selfobservation; this is shown even by the tense attitude and the wrinkled brow of the man in a state of reflection, as opposed to the mimic tranquillity
of the man observing himself. In both cases there must be concentrated attention, but the reflective man makes use of his critical faculties, with
the result that he rejects some of the thoughts which rise into consciousness after he has become aware of them, and abruptly interrupts others, so
that he does not follow the lines of thought which they would otherwise open up for him; while in respect of yet other thoughts he is able to
behave in such a manner that they do not become conscious at all - that is to say, they are suppressed before they are perceived. In selfobservation, on the other hand, he has but one task - that of suppressing criticism; if he succeeds in doing this, an unlimited number of thoughts
enter his consciousness which would otherwise have eluded his grasp. With the aid of the material thus obtained - material which is new to the
self-observer - it is possible to achieve the interpretation of pathological ideas, and also that of dream-formations. As will be seen, the point is to
induce a psychic state which is in some degree analogous, as regards the distribution of psychic energy (mobile attention), to the state of the mind
before falling asleep - and also, of course, to the hypnotic state. On falling asleep the undesired ideas emerge, owing to the slackening of a certain
arbitrary (and, of course, also critical) action, which is allowed to influence the trend of our ideas; we are accustomed to speak of fatigue as the
reason of this slackening; the emerging undesired ideas are changed into visual and auditory images. In the condition which it utilized for the
analysis of dreams and pathological ideas, this activity is purposely and deliberately renounced, and the psychic energy thus saved (or some part
of it) is employed in attentively tracking the undesired thoughts which now come to the surface - thoughts which retain their identity as ideas (in
which the condition differs from the state of falling asleep). Undesired ideas are thus changed into desired ones.
There are many people who do not seem to find it easy to adopt the required attitude toward the apparently "freely rising" ideas, and to renounce
the criticism which is otherwise applied to them. The "undesired ideas" habitually evoke the most violent resistance, which seeks to prevent them
from coming to the surface. But if we may credit our great poet-philosopher Friedrich Schiller, the essential condition of poetical creation
includes a very similar attitude. In a certain passage in his correspondence with Korner (for the tracing of which we are indebted to Otto Rank),
Schiller replies in the following words to a friend who complains of his lack of creative power: "The reason for your complaint lies, it seems to
me, in the constraint which your intellect imposes upon your imagination. Here I will make an observation, and illustrate it by an allegory.
Apparently it is not good - and indeed it hinders the creative work of the mind - if the intellect examines too closely the ideas already pouring in,
as it were, at the gates. Regarded in isolation, an idea may be quite insignificant, and venturesome in the extreme, but it may acquire importance
from an idea which follows it; perhaps, in a certain collocation with other ideas, which may seem equally absurd, it may be capable of furnishing
a very serviceable link. The intellect cannot judge all these ideas unless it can retain them until it has considered them in connection with these
other ideas. In the case of a creative mind, it seems to me, the intellect has withdrawn its watchers from the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell,
and only then does it review and inspect the multitude. You worthy critics, or whatever you may call yourselves, are ashamed or afraid of the
momentary and passing madness which is found in all real creators, the longer or shorter duration of which distinguishes the thinking artist from
the dreamer. Hence your complaints of unfruitfulness, for you reject too soon and discriminate too severely" (letter of December 1, 1788).
And yet, such a withdrawal of the watchers from the gates of the intellect, as Schiller puts it, such a translation into the condition of uncritical selfobservation, is by no means difficult.
Most of my patients accomplish it after my first instructions. I myself can do so very completely, if I assist the process by writing down the ideas
that flash through my mind. The quantum of psychic energy by which the critical activity is thus reduced, and by which the intensity of selfobservation may be increased, varies considerably according to the subject-matter upon which the attention is to be fixed.
The first step in the application of this procedure teaches us that one cannot make the dream as a whole the object of one's attention, but only the
individual components of its content. If I ask a patient who is as yet unpractised: "What occurs to you in connection with this dream?" he is
unable, as a rule, to fix upon anything in his psychic field of vision. I must first dissect the dream for him; then, in connection with each fragment,
he gives me a number of ideas which may be described as the thoughts behind this part of the dream. In this first and important condition, then, 
the method of dream-interpretation which I employ diverges from the popular, historical and legendary method of interpretation by symbolism
and approaches more nearly to the second or cipher method. Like this, it is an interpretation in detail, not en masse; like this, it conceives the
dream, from the outset, as something built up, as a conglomerate of psychic formations.
In the course of my psycho-analysis of neurotics I have already subjected perhaps more than a thousand dreams to interpretation, but I do not
wish to use this material now as an introduction to the theory and technique of dream-interpretation. For quite apart from the fact that I should lay
myself open to the objection that these are the dreams of neuropaths, so that the conclusions drawn from them would not apply to the dreams of
healthy persons, there is another reason that impels me to reject them. The theme to which these dreams point is, of course, always the history of
the malady that is responsible for the neurosis. Hence every dream would require a very long introduction, and an investigation of the nature and
aetiological conditions of the psychoneuroses, matters which are in themselves novel and exceedingly strange, and which would therefore distract
attention from the dream-problem proper. My purpose is rather to prepare the way, by the solution of the dream-problem, for the solution of the
more difficult problems of the psychology of the neuroses. But if I eliminate the dreams of neurotics, which constitute my principal material, I
cannot be too fastidious in my treatment of the rest. Only those dreams are left which have been incidentally related to me by healthy persons of
my acquaintance, or which I find given as examples in the literature of dream-life. Unfortunately, in all these dreams I am deprived of the analysis
without which I cannot find the meaning of the dream. My mode of procedure is, of course, less easy than that of the popular cipher method,
which translates the given dream-content by reference to an established key; I, on the contrary, hold that the same dream-content may conceal a
different meaning in the case of different persons, or in different connections. I must, therefore, resort to my own dreams as a source of abundant
and convenient material, furnished by a person who is more or less normal, and containing references to many incidents of everyday life. I shall
certainly be confronted with doubts as to the trustworthiness of these self-analyses and it will be said that arbitrariness is by no means excluded in
such analyses. In my own judgment, conditions are more likely to be favourable in self-observation than in the observation of others; in any case,
it is permissible to investigate how much can be accomplished in the matter of dream-interpretation by means of self-analysis. There are other
difficulties which must be overcome in my own inner self. One has a comprehensible aversion to exposing so many intimate details of one's own
psychic life, and one does not feel secure against the misinterpretations of strangers. But one must be able to transcend such considerations. "Tout
psychologiste," writes Delboeuf, "est oblige de faire l'aveu meme de ses faiblesses s'il croit par la jeter du jour sur quelque probleme obscur."[7]
And I may assume for the reader that his initial interest in the indiscretions which I must commit will very soon give way to an exclusive
engrossment in the psychological problems elucidated by them.'[8]
I shall therefore select one of my own dreams for the purpose of elucidating my method of interpretation. Every such dream necessitates a
preliminary statement; so that I must now beg the reader to make my interests his own for a time, and to become absorbed, with me, in the most
trifling details of my life; for an interest in the hidden significance of dreams imperatively demands just such a transference.
Preliminary Statement
In the summer of 1895 I had treated psycho-analytically a young lady who was an intimate friend of mine and of my family. It will be understood
that such complicated relations may excite manifold feelings in the physician, and especially the psychotherapist. The personal interest of the
physician is greater, but his authority less. If he fails, his friendship with the patient's relatives is in danger of being undermined. In this case,
however, the treatment ended in partial success; the patient was cured of her hysterical anxiety, but not of all her somatic symptoms. At that time
I was not yet quite sure of the criteria which denote the final cure of an hysterical case, and I expected her to accept a solution which did not seem
acceptable to her. In the midst of this disagreement, we discontinued the treatment for the summer holidays. One day a younger colleague, one of
my most intimate friends, who had visited the patient - Irma - and her family in their country residence, called upon me. I asked him how Irma
was, and received the reply: "She is better, but not quite well." I realize that these words of my friend Otto's, or the tone of voice in which they
were spoken, annoyed me. I thought I heard a reproach in the words, perhaps to the effect that I had promised the patient too much, and - rightly
or wrongly - I attributed Otto's apparent taking sides against me to the influence of the patient's relatives, who, I assumed, had never approved of
my treatment. This disagreeable impression, however, did not become clear to me, nor did I speak of it. That same evening I wrote the clinical
history of Irma's case, in order to give it, as though to justify myself, to Dr. M, a mutual friend, who was at that time the leading personality in our
circle. During the night (or rather in the early morning) I had the following dream, which I recorded immediately after waking.[9]
Dream of July 23-24, 1895
A great hall - a number of guests, whom we are receiving - among them Irma, whom I immediately take aside, as though to answer her letter, and
to reproach her for not yet accepting the "solution." I say to her: "If you still have pains, it is really only your own fault." - She answers: "If you
only knew what pains I have now in the throat, stomach, and abdomen - I am choked by them." I am startled, and look at her. She looks pale and
puffy. I think that after all I must be overlooking some organic affection. I take her to the window and look into her throat. She offers some
resistance to this, like a woman who has a set of false teeth. I think, surely, she doesn't need them. - The mouth then opens wide, and I find a large
white spot on the right, and elsewhere I see extensive grayish-white scabs adhering to curiously curled formations, which are evidently shaped
like the turbinal bones of the nose. - I quickly call Dr. M, who repeats the examination and confirms it.... Dr. M looks quite unlike his usual self;
he is very pale, he limps, and his chin is clean-shaven.... Now my friend Otto, too, is standing beside her, and my friend Leopold percusses her
covered chest, and says "She has a dullness below, on the left," and also calls attention to an infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder (which
I can feel, in spite of the dress).... M says: "There's no doubt that it's an infection, but it doesn't matter; dysentery will follow and the poison will 
be eliminated." ... We know, too, precisely how the infection originated. My friend Otto, not long ago, gave her, when she was feeling unwell, an
injection of a preparation of propyl... propyls... propionic acid... trimethylamin (the formula of which I see before me, printed in heavy type)....
One doesn't give such injections so rashly.... Probably, too, the syringe was not clean.
This dream has an advantage over many others. It is at once obvious to what events of the preceding day it is related, and of what subject it treats.
The preliminary statement explains these matters. The news of Irma's health which I had received from Otto, and the clinical history, which I was
writing late into the night, had occupied my psychic activities even during sleep. Nevertheless, no one who had read the preliminary report, and
had knowledge of the content of the dream, could guess what the dream signified. Nor do I myself know. I am puzzled by the morbid symptoms
of which Irma complains in the dream, for they are not the symptoms for which I treated her. I smile at the nonsensical idea of an injection of
propionic acid, and at Dr. M's attempt at consolation. Towards the end the dream seems more obscure and quicker in tempo than at the beginning.
In order to learn the significance of all these details I resolve to undertake an exhaustive analysis.
Analysis
The hall - a number of guests, whom we are receiving. We were living that summer at Bellevue, an isolated house on one of the hills adjoining
the Kahlenberg. This house was originally built as a place of entertainment, and therefore has unusually lofty, hall-like rooms. The dream was
dreamed in Bellevue, a few days before my wife's birthday. During the day my wife had mentioned that she expected several friends, and among
them Irma, to come to us as guests for her birthday. My dream, then, anticipates this situation: It is my wife's birthday, and we are receiving a
number of people, among them Irma, as guests in the large hall of Bellevue.
I reproach Irma for not having accepted the "solution." I say, "If you still have pains, it is really your own fault." I might even have said this while
awake; I may have actually said it. At that time I was of the opinion (recognized later to be incorrect) that my task was limited to informing
patients of the hidden meaning of their symptoms. Whether they then accepted or did not accept the solution upon which success depended - for
that I was not responsible. I am grateful to this error, which, fortunately, has now been overcome, since it made life easier for me at a time when,
with all my unavoidable ignorance, I was expected to effect successful cures. But I note that, in the speech which I make to Irma in the dream, I
am above all anxious that I shall not be blamed for the pains which she still suffers. If it is Irma's own fault, it cannot be mine. Should the purpose
of the dream be looked for in this quarter?
Irma's complaints - pains in the neck, abdomen, and stomach; she is choked by them. Pains in the stomach belonged to the symptom - complex of
my patient, but they were not very prominent; she complained rather of qualms and a feeling of nausea. Pains in the neck and abdomen and
constriction of the throat played hardly any part in her case. I wonder why I have decided upon this choice of symptoms in the dream; for the
moment I cannot discover the reason.
She looks pale and puffy. My patient had always a rosy complexion. I suspect that here another person is being substituted for her.
I am startled at the idea that I may have overlooked some organic affection. This, as the reader will readily believe, is a constant fear with the
specialist who sees neurotics almost exclusively, and who is accustomed to ascribe to hysteria so many manifestations which other physicians
treat as organic. On the other hand, I am haunted by a faint doubt - I do not know whence it comes - whether my alarm is altogether honest. If
Irma's pains are indeed of organic origin, it is not my duty to cure them. My treatment, of course, removes only hysterical pains. It seems to me,
in fact, that I wish to find an error in the diagnosis; for then I could not be reproached with failure to effect a cure.
I take her to the window in order to look into her throat. She resists a little, like a woman who has false teeth. I think to myself, she does not need
them. I had never had occasion to inspect Irma's oral cavity. The incident in the dream reminds me of an examination, made some time before, of
a governess who at first produced an impression of youthful beauty, but who, upon opening her mouth, took certain measures to conceal her
denture. Other memories of medical examinations, and of petty secrets revealed by them, to the embarrassment of both physician and patient,
associate themselves with this case. - "She surely does not need them," is perhaps in the first place a compliment to Irma; but I suspect yet another
meaning. In a careful analysis one is able to feel whether or not the arriere-pensees which are to be expected have all been exhausted. The way in
which Irma stands at the window suddenly reminds me of another experience. Irma has an intimate woman friend of whom I think very highly.
One evening, on paying her a visit, I found her at the window in the position reproduced in the dream, and her physician, the same Dr. M,
declared that she had a diphtheritic membrane. The person of Dr. M and the membrane return, indeed, in the course of the dream. Now it occurs
to me that during the past few months I have had every reason to suppose that this lady too is hysterical. Yes, Irma herself betrayed the fact to me.
But what do I know of her condition? Only the one thing, that like Irma in the dream she suffers from hysterical choking. Thus, in the dream I
have replaced my patient by her friend. Now I remember that I have often played with the supposition that this lady, too, might ask me to relieve
her of her symptoms. But even at the time I thought it improbable, since she is extremely reserved. She resists, as the dream shows. Another
explanation might be that she does not need it; in fact, until now she has shown herself strong enough to master her condition without outside
help. Now only a few features remain, which I can assign neither to Irma nor to her friend; pale, puffy, false teeth. The false teeth led me to the
governess; I now feel inclined to be satisfied with bad teeth. Here another person, to whom these features may allude, occurs to me. She is not my
patient, and I do not wish her to be my patient, for I have noticed that she is not at her ease with me, and I do not consider her a docile patient.
She is generally pale, and once, when she had not felt particularly well, she was puffy.[10] I have thus compared my patient Irma with two others,
who would likewise resist treatment. What is the meaning of the fact that I have exchanged her for her friend in the dream? Perhaps that I wish to 
exchange her; either her friend arouses in me stronger sympathies, or I have a higher regard for her intelligence. For I consider Irma foolish
because she does not accept my solution. The other woman would be more sensible, and would thus be more likely to yield. The mouth then
opens readily; she would tell more than Irma.[11]
What I see in the throat: a white spot and scabby turbinal bones. The white spot recalls diphtheria, and thus Irma's friend, but it also recalls the
grave illness of my eldest daughter two years earlier, and all the anxiety of that unhappy time. The scab on the turbinal bones reminds me of my
anxiety concerning my own health. At that time I frequently used cocaine in order to suppress distressing swellings in the nose, and I had heard a
few days previously that a lady patient who did likewise had contracted an extensive necrosis of the nasal mucous membrane. In 1885 it was I
who had recommended the use of cocaine, and I had been gravely reproached in consequence. A dear friend, who had died before the date of this
dream, had hastened his end by the misuse of this remedy.
I quickly call Dr. M, who repeats the examination. This would simply correspond to the position which M occupied among us. But the word
quickly is striking enough to demand a special examination. It reminds me of a sad medical experience. By continually prescribing a drug
(sulphonal), which at that time was still considered harmless, I was once responsible for a condition of acute poisoning in the case of a woman
patient, and hastily turned for assistance to my older and more experienced colleague. The fact that I really had this case in mind is confirmed by
a subsidiary circumstance. The patient, who succumbed to the toxic effects of the drug, bore the same name as my eldest daughter. I had never
thought of this until now; but now it seems to me almost like a retribution of fate - as though the substitution of persons had to be continued in
another sense: this Matilda for that Matilda; an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. It is as though I were seeking every opportunity to reproach
myself for a lack of medical conscientiousness.
Dr. M is pale; his chin is shaven, and he limps. Of this so much is correct, that his unhealthy appearance often arouses the concern of his friends.
The other two characteristics must belong to another person. An elder brother living abroad occurs to me, for he, too, shaves his chin, and if I
remember him rightly, the M of the dream bears on the whole a certain resemblance to him. And some days previously the news arrived that he
was limping on account of an arthritic affection of the hip. There must be some reason why I fuse the two persons into one in my dream. I
remember that, in fact, I was on bad terms with both of them for similar reasons. Both had rejected a certain proposal which I had recently made
them.
My friend Otto is now standing next to the patient, and my friend Leopold examines her and calls attention to a dulness low down on the left side.
My friend Leopold also is a physician, and a relative of Otto's. Since the two practice the same specialty, fate has made them competitors, so that
they are constantly being compared with one another. Both of them assisted me for years, while I was still directing a public clinic for neurotic
children. There, scenes like that reproduced in my dream had often taken place. While I would be discussing the diagnosis of a case with Otto,
Leopold would examine the child anew and make an unexpected contribution towards our decision. There was a difference of character between
the two men like that between Inspector Brasig and his friend Karl. Otto was remarkably prompt and alert; Leopold was slow and thoughtful, but
thorough. If I contrast Otto and the cautious Leopold in the dream I do so, apparently, in order to extol Leopold. The comparison is like that made
above between the disobedient patient Irma and her friend, who was believed to be more sensible. I now become aware of one of the tracks along
which the association of ideas in the dream proceeds: from the sick child to the children's clinic. Concerning the dulness low on the left side, I
have the impression that it corresponds with a certain case of which all the details were similar, a case in which Leopold impressed me by his
thoroughness. I thought vaguely, too, of something like a metastatic affection, but it might also be a reference to the patient whom I should have
liked to have in Irma's place. For this lady, as far as I can gather, exhibited symptoms which imitated tuberculosis.
An infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder. I know at once that this is my own rheumatism of the shoulder, which I always feel if I lie
awake long at night. The very phrasing of the dream sounds ambiguous: Something which I can feel, as he does, in spite of the dress. "Feel on my
own body" is intended. Further, it occurs to me how unusual the phrase infiltrated portion of skin sounds. We are accustomed to the phrase: "an
infiltration of the upper posterior left"; this would refer to the lungs, and thus, once more, to tuberculosis.
In spite of the dress. This, to be sure, is only an interpolation. At the clinic the children were, of course, examined undressed; here we have some
contrast to the manner in which adult female patients have to be examined. The story used to be told of an eminent physician that he always
examined his patients through their clothes. The rest is obscure to me; I have, frankly, no inclination to follow the matter further.
Dr. M says: "It's an infection, but it doesn't matter; dysentery will follow, and the poison will be eliminated." This, at first, seems to me
ridiculous; nevertheless, like everything else, it must be carefully analysed; more closely observed it seems after all to have a sort of meaning.
What I had found in the patient was a local diphtheritis. I remember the discussion about diphtheritis and diphtheria at the time of my daughter's
illness. Diphtheria is the general infection which proceeds from local diphtheritis. Leopold demonstrates the existence of such a general infection
by the dulness, which also suggests a metastatic focus. I believe, however, that just this kind of metastasis does not occur in the case of diphtheria.
It reminds me rather of pyaemia.
It doesn't matter is a consolation. I believe it fits in as follows: The last part of the dream has yielded a content to the effect that the patient's
sufferings are the result of a serious organic affection. I begin to suspect that by this I am only trying to shift the blame from myself. Psychic
treatment cannot be held responsible for the continued presence of a diphtheritic affection. Now, indeed, I am distressed by the thought of having 
invented such a serious illness for Irma, for the sole purpose of exculpating myself. It seems so cruel. Accordingly, I need the assurance that the
outcome will be benign, and it seems to me that I made a good choice when I put the words that consoled me into the mouth of Dr. M. But here I
am placing myself in a position of superiority to the dream; a fact which needs explanation.
But why is this consolation so nonsensical?
Dysentery. Some sort of far-fetched theoretical notion that the toxins of disease might be eliminated through the intestines. Am I thereby trying to
make fun of Dr. M's remarkable store of far-fetched explanations, his habit of conceiving curious pathological relations? Dysentery suggests
something else. A few months ago I had in my care a young man who was suffering from remarkable intestinal troubles; a case which had been
treated by other colleagues as one of "anaemia with malnutrition." I realized that it was a case of hysteria; I was unwilling to use my psychotherapy on him, and sent him off on a sea-voyage. Now a few days previously I had received a despairing letter from him; he wrote from Egypt,
saying that he had had a fresh attack, which the doctor had declared to be dysentery. I suspect that the diagnosis is merely an error on the part of
an ignorant colleague, who is allowing himself to be fooled by the hysteria; yet I cannot help reproaching myself for putting the invalid in a
position where he might contract some organic affection of the bowels in addition to his hysteria. Furthermore, dysentery sounds not unlike
diphtheria, a word which does not occur in the dream.
Yes, it must be the case that with the consoling prognosis, Dysentery will develop, etc., I am making fun of Dr. M, for I recollect that years ago
he once jestingly told a very similar story of a colleague. He had been called in to consult with him in the case of a woman who was very
seriously ill, and he felt obliged to confront his colleague, who seemed very hopeful, with the fact that he found albumen in the patient's urine.
His colleague, however, did not allow this to worry him, but answered calmly: "That does not matter, my dear sir; the albumen will soon be
excreted!" Thus I can no longer doubt that this part of the dream expresses derision for those of my colleagues who are ignorant of hysteria. And,
as though in confirmation, the thought enters my mind: "Does Dr. M know that the appearances in Irma's friend, his patient, which gave him
reason to fear tuberculosis, are likewise due to hysteria? Has he recognized this hysteria, or has he allowed himself to be fooled?"
But what can be my motive in treating this friend so badly? That is simple enough: Dr. M agrees with my solution as little as does Irma herself.
Thus, in this dream I have already revenged myself on two persons: on Irma in the words, If you still have pains, it is your own fault, and on Dr.
M in the wording of the nonsensical consolation which has been put into his mouth.
We know precisely how the infection originated. This precise knowledge in the dream is remarkable. Only a moment before this we did not yet
know of the infection, since it was first demonstrated by Leopold.
My friend Otto gave her an injection not long ago, when she was feeling unwell. Otto had actually related during his short visit to Irma's family
that he had been called in to a neighbouring hotel in order to give an injection to someone who had been suddenly taken ill. Injections remind me
once more of the unfortunate friend who poisoned himself with cocaine. I had recommended the remedy for internal use only during the
withdrawal of morphia; but he immediately gave himself injections of cocaine.
With a preparation of propyl... propyls... propionic acid. How on earth did this occur to me? On the evening of the day after I had written the
clinical history and dreamed about the case, my wife opened a bottle of liqueur labelled "Ananas,"[12] which was a present from our friend Otto.
He had, as a matter of fact, a habit of making presents on every possible occasion; I hope he will some day be cured of this by a wife.[13] This
liqueur smelt so strongly of fusel oil that I refused to drink it. My wife suggested: "We will give the bottle to the servants," and I, more prudent,
objected, with the philanthropic remark: "They shan't be poisoned either." The smell of fusel oil (amyl...) has now apparently awakened my
memory of the whole series: propyl, methyl, etc., which furnished the preparation of propyl mentioned in the dream. Here, indeed, I have effected
a substitution: I dreamt of propyl after smelling amyl; but substitutions of this kind are perhaps permissible, especially in organic chemistry. -
Trimethylamin. In the dream I see the chemical formula of this substance - which at all events is evidence of a great effort on the part of my
memory - and the formula is even printed in heavy type, as though to distinguish it from the context as something of particular importance. And
where does trimethylamin, thus forced on my attention, lead me? To a conversation with another friend, who for years has been familiar with all
my germinating ideas, and I with his. At that time he had just informed me of certain ideas concerning a sexual chemistry, and had mentioned,
among others, that he thought he had found in trimethylamin one of the products of sexual metabolism. This substance thus leads me to sexuality,
the factor to which I attribute the greatest significance in respect of the origin of these nervous affections which I am trying to cure. My patient
Irma is a young widow; if I am required to excuse my failure to cure her, I shall perhaps do best to refer to this condition, which her admirers
would be glad to terminate. But in what a singular fashion such a dream is fitted together! The friend who in my dream becomes my patient in
Irma's place is likewise a young widow.
I surmise why it is that the formula of trimethylamin is so insistent in the dream. So many important things are centered about this one word:
trimethylamin is an allusion, not merely to the all-important factor of sexuality, but also to a friend whose sympathy I remember with satisfaction
whenever I feel isolated in my opinions. And this friend, who plays such a large part in my life: will he not appear yet again in the concatenation
of ideas peculiar to this dream? Of course; he has a special knowledge of the results of affections of the nose and the sinuses, and has revealed to
science several highly remarkable relations between the turbinal bones and the female sexual organs. (The three curly formations in Irma's throat.) 
I got him to examine Irma, in order to determine whether her gastric pains were of nasal origin. But he himself suffers from suppurative rhinitis,
which gives me concern, and to this perhaps there is an allusion in pyaemia, which hovers before me in the metastasis of the dream.
One doesn't give such injections so rashly. Here the reproach of rashness is hurled directly at my friend Otto. I believe I had some such thought in
the afternoon, when he seemed to indicate, by word and look, that he had taken sides against me. It was, perhaps: "How easily he is influenced;
how irresponsibly he pronounces judgment." Further, the above sentence points once more to my deceased friend, who so irresponsibly resorted
to cocaine injections. As I have said, I had not intended that injections of the drug should be taken. I note that in reproaching Otto I once more
touch upon the story of the unfortunate Matilda, which was the pretext for the same reproach against me. Here, obviously, I am collecting
examples of my conscientiousness, and also of the reverse.
Probably too the syringe was not clean. Another reproach directed at Otto, but originating elsewhere. On the previous day I happened to meet the
son of an old lady of eighty-two, to whom I am obliged to give two injections of morphia daily. At present she is in the country, and I have heard
that she is suffering from phlebitis. I immediately thought that this might be a case of infiltration caused by a dirty syringe. It is my pride that in
two years I have not given her a single infiltration; I am always careful, of course, to see that the syringe is perfectly clean. For I am
conscientious. From the phlebitis I return to my wife, who once suffered from thrombosis during a period of pregnancy, and now three related
situations come to the surface in my memory, involving my wife, Irma, and the dead Matilda, whose identity has apparently justified my putting
these three persons in one another's places.
I have now completed the interpretation of the dream.[14] In the course of this interpretation I have taken great pains to avoid all those notions
which must have been suggested by a comparison of the dream-content with the dream-thoughts hidden behind this content. Meanwhile the
meaning of the dream has dawned upon me. I have noted an intention which is realized through the dream, and which must have been my motive
in dreaming. The dream fulfills several wishes, which were awakened within me by the events of the previous evening (Otto's news, and the
writing of the clinical history). For the result of the dream is that it is not I who am to blame for the pain which Irma is still suffering, but that
Otto is to blame for it. Now Otto has annoyed me by his remark about Irma's imperfect cure; the dream avenges me upon him, in that it turns the
reproach upon himself. The dream acquits me of responsibility for Irma's condition, as it refers this condition to other causes (which do, indeed,
furnish quite a number of explanations). The dream represents a certain state of affairs, such as I might wish to exist; the content of the dream is
thus the fulfilment of a wish; its motive is a wish.
This much is apparent at first sight. But many other details of the dream become intelligible when regarded from the standpoint of wishfulfilment. I take my revenge on Otto, not merely for too readily taking sides against me. in that I accuse him of careless medical treatment (the
injection), but I revenge myself also for the bad liqueur which smells of fusel oil, and I find an expression in the dream which unites both these
reproaches: the injection of a preparation of propyl. Still I am not satisfied, but continue to avenge myself by comparing him with his more
reliable colleague. Thereby I seem to say: "I like him better than you." But Otto is not the only person who must be made to feel the weight of my
anger. I take my revenge on the disobedient patient, by exchanging her for a more sensible and more docile one. Nor do I pass over Dr. M's
contradiction; for I express, in an obvious allusion, my opinion of him: namely, that his attitude in this case is that of an ignoramus (Dysentery
will develop, etc.). Indeed, it seems as though I were appealing from him to someone better informed (my friend, who told me about
trimethylamin), just as I have turned from Irma to her friend, and from Otto to Leopold. It is as though I were to say: Rid me of these three
persons, replace them by three others of my own choice, and I shall be rid of the reproaches which I am not willing to admit that I deserve! In my
dream the unreasonableness of these reproaches is demonstrated for me in the most elaborate manner. Irma's pains are not attributable to me,
since she herself is to blame for them, in that she refuses to accept my solution. They do not concern me, for being as they are of an organic
nature, they cannot possibly be cured by psychic treatment. Irma's sufferings are satisfactorily explained by her widowhood (trimethylamin!); a
state which I cannot alter. Irma's illness has been caused by an incautious injection administered by Otto, an injection of an unsuitable drug, such
as I should never have administered. Irma's complaint is the result of an injection made with an unclean syringe, like the phlebitis of my old lady
patient, whereas my injections have never caused any ill effects. I am aware that these explanations of Irma's illness, which unite in acquitting me,
do not agree with one another; that they even exclude one another. The whole plea - for this dream is nothing else - recalls vividly the defence
offered by a man who was accused by his neighbour of having returned a kettle in a damaged condition. In the first place, he had returned the
kettle undamaged; in the second place it already had holes in it when he borrowed it; and in the third place, he had never borrowed it at all. A
complicated defence, but so much the better; if only one of these three lines of defence is recognized as valid, the man must be acquitted.
Still other themes play a part in the dream, and their relation to my non-responsibility for Irma's illness is not so apparent: my daughter's illness,
and that of a patient with the same name; the harmfulness of cocaine; the affection of my patient, who was traveling in Egypt; concern about the
health of my wife; my brother, and Dr. M; my own physical troubles, and anxiety concerning my absent friend, who is suffering from suppurative
rhinitis. But if I keep all these things in view, they combine into a single train of thought, which might be labelled: Concern for the health of
myself and others; professional conscientiousness. I recall a vaguely disagreeable feeling when Otto gave me the news of Irma's condition. Lastly,
I am inclined, after the event, to find an expression of this fleeting sensation in the train of thoughts which forms part of the dream. It is as though
Otto had said to me: "You do not take your medical duties seriously enough; you are not conscientious; you do not perform what you promise."
Thereupon this train of thought placed itself at my service, in order that I might give proof of my extreme conscientiousness, of my intimate
concern about the health of my relatives, friends and patients. Curiously enough, there are also some painful memories in this material, which
confirm the blame attached to Otto rather than my own exculpation. The material is apparently impartial, but the connection between this broader
material, on which the dream is based, and the more limited theme from which emerges the wish to be innocent of Irma's illness, is, nevertheless, 
unmistakable.
I do not wish to assert that I have entirely revealed the meaning of the dream, or that my interpretation is flawless.
I could still spend much time upon it; I could draw further explanations from it, and discuss further problems which it seems to propound. I can
even perceive the points from which further mental associations might be traced; but such considerations as are always involved in every dream
of one's own prevent me from interpreting it farther. Those who are overready to condemn such reserve should make the experiment of trying to
be more straightforward. For the present I am content with the one fresh discovery which has just been made: If the method of dreaminterpretation here indicated is followed, it will be found that dreams do really possess a meaning, and are by no means the expression of a
disintegrated cerebral activity, as the writers on the subject would have us believe. When the work of interpretation has been completed the dream
can be recognized as a wish fulfilment. 

When, after passing through a narrow defile, one suddenly reaches a height beyond which the ways part and a rich prospect lies outspread in
different directions, it is well to stop for a moment and consider whither one shall turn next. We are in somewhat the same position after we have
mastered this first interpretation of a dream. We find ourselves standing in the light of a sudden discovery. The dream is not comparable to the
irregular sounds of a musical instrument, which, instead of being played by the hand of a musician, is struck by some external force; the dream is
not meaningless, not absurd, does not presuppose that one part of our store of ideas is dormant while another part begins to awake. It is a perfectly
valid psychic phenomenon, actually a wish-fulfilment; it may be enrolled in the continuity of the intelligible psychic activities of the waking state;
it is built up by a highly complicated intellectual activity. But at the very moment when we are about to rejoice in this discovery a host of
problems besets us. If the dream, as this theory defines it, represents a fulfilled wish, what is the cause of the striking and unfamiliar manner in
which this fulfilment is expressed? What transformation has occurred in our dream-thoughts before the manifest dream, as we remember it on
waking, shapes itself out of them? How has this transformation taken place? Whence comes the material that is worked up into the dream? What
causes many of the peculiarities which are to be observed in our dream-thoughts; for example, how is it that they are able to contradict one
another? Is the dream capable of teaching us something new concerning our internal psychic processes and can its content correct opinions which
we have held during the day? I suggest that for the present all these problems be laid aside, and that a single path be pursued. We have found that
the dream represents a wish as fulfilled. Our next purpose should be to ascertain whether this is a general characteristic of dreams, or whether it is
only the accidental content of the particular dream (the dream about Irma's injection) with which we have begun our analysis; for even if we
conclude that every dream has a meaning and psychic value, we must nevertheless allow for the possibility that this meaning may not be the same
in every dream. The first dream which we have considered was the fulfilment of a wish; another may turn out to be the realization of an
apprehension; a third may have a reflection as its content; a fourth may simply reproduce a reminiscence. Are there, then dreams other than wishdreams; or are there none but wish-dreams? -
It is easy to show that the wish-fulfilment in dreams is often undisguised and easy to recognize, so that one may wonder why the language of 
dreams has not long since been understood. There is, for example, a dream which I can evoke as often as I please, experimentally, as it were. If, in
the evening, I eat anchovies, olives, or other strongly salted foods, I am thirsty at night, and therefore I wake. The waking, however, is preceded
by a dream, which has always the same content, namely, that I am drinking. I am drinking long draughts of water; it tastes as delicious as only a
cool drink can taste when one's throat is parched; and then I wake, and find that I have an actual desire to drink. The cause of this dream is thirst,
which I perceive when I wake. From this sensation arises the wish to drink, and the dream shows me this wish as fulfilled. It thereby serves a
function, the nature of which I soon surmise. I sleep well, and am not accustomed to being waked by a bodily need. If I succeed in appeasing my
thirst by means of the dream that I am drinking, I need not wake up in order to satisfy that thirst. It is thus a dream of convenience. The dream
takes the place of action, as elsewhere in life. Unfortunately, the need of water to quench the thirst cannot be satisfied by a dream, as can my thirst
for revenge upon Otto and Dr. M, but the intention is the same. Not long ago I had the same dream in a somewhat modified form. On this
occasion I felt thirsty before going to bed, and emptied the glass of water which stood on the little chest beside my bed. Some hours later, during
the night, my thirst returned, with the consequent discomfort. In order to obtain water, I should have had to get up and fetch the glass which stood
on my wife's bed-table. I thus quite appropriately dreamt that my wife was giving me a drink from a vase; this vase was an Etruscan cinerary urn,
which I had brought home from Italy and had since given away. But the water in it tasted so salt (apparently on account of the ashes) that I was
forced to wake. It may be observed how conveniently the dream is capable of arranging matters. Since the fulfilment of a wish is its only purpose,
it may be perfectly egoistic. Love of comfort is really not compatible with consideration for others. The introduction of the cinerary urn is
probably once again the fulfilment of a wish; I regret that I no longer possess this vase; it, like the glass of water at my wife's side, is inaccessible
to me. The cinerary urn is appropriate also in connection with the sensation of an increasingly salty taste, which I know will compel me to wake.
[1] -
Such convenience-dreams came very frequently to me in my youth. Accustomed as I had always been to working until late at night, early waking
was always a matter of difficulty. I used then to dream that I was out of bed and standing at the wash-stand. After a while I could no longer shut
out the knowledge that I was not yet up; but in the meantime I had continued to sleep. The same sort of lethargy-dream was dreamed by a young
colleague of mine, who appears to share my propensity for sleep. With him it assumed a particularly amusing form. The landlady with whom he
was lodging in the neighbourhood of the hospital had strict orders to wake him every morning at a given hour, but she found it by no means easy
to carry out his orders. One morning sleep was especially sweet to him. The woman called into his room: "Herr Pepi, get up; you've got to go to
the hospital." Whereupon the sleeper dreamt of a room in the hospital, of a bed in which he was lying, and of a chart pinned over his head, which
read as follows: "Pepi M, medical student, 22 years of age." He told himself in the dream: "If I am already at the hospital, I don't have to go
there," turned over, and slept on. He had thus frankly admitted to himself his motive for dreaming.
Here is yet another dream of which the stimulus was active during sleep: One of my women patients, who had been obliged to undergo an
unsuccessful operation on the jaw, was instructed by her physicians to wear by day and night a cooling apparatus on the affected cheek; but she
was in the habit of throwing it off as soon as she had fallen asleep. One day I was asked to reprove her for doing so; she had again thrown the
apparatus on the floor. The patient defended herself as follows: "This time I really couldn't help it; it was the result of a dream which I had during
the night. In the dream I was in a box at the opera, and was taking a lively interest in the performance. But Herr Karl Meyer was lying in the
sanatorium and complaining pitifully on account of pains in his jaw. I said to myself, 'Since I haven't the pains, I don't need the apparatus either';
that's why I threw it away." The dream of this poor sufferer reminds me of an expression which comes to our lips when we are in a disagreeable
situation: "Well, I can imagine more amusing things!" The dream presents these "more amusing things!" Herr Karl Meyer, to whom the dreamer
attributed her pains, was the most casual acquaintance of whom she could think.
It is quite as simple a matter to discover the wish-fulfilment in several other dreams which I have collected from healthy persons. A friend who
was acquainted with my theory of dreams, and had explained it to his wife, said to me one day: "My wife asked me to tell you that she dreamt
yesterday that she was having her menses. You will know what that means." Of course I know: if the young wife dreams that she is having her
menses, the menses have stopped. I can well imagine that she would have liked to enjoy her freedom a little longer, before the discomforts of
maternity began. It was a clever way of giving notice of her first pregnancy. Another friend writes that his wife had dreamt not long ago that she
noticed milk-stains on the front of her blouse. This also is an indication of pregnancy, but not of the first one; the young mother hoped she would
have more nourishment for the second child than she had for the first.
A young woman who for weeks had been cut off from all society because she was nursing a child who was suffering from an infectious disease
dreamt, after the child had recovered, of a company of people in which Alphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, Marcel Prevost and others were present;
they were all very pleasant to her and amused her enormously. In her dream these different authors had the features which their portraits give
them. M. Prevost, with whose portrait she is not familiar, looked like the man who had disinfected the sickroom the day before, the first outsider
to enter it for a long time. Obviously the dream is to be translated thus: "It is about time now for something more entertaining than this eternal
nursing."
Perhaps this collection will suffice to prove that frequently, and under the most complex conditions, dreams may be noted which can be
understood only as wish-fulfilments, and which present their content without concealment. In most cases these are short and simple dreams, and
they stand in pleasant contrast to the confused and overloaded dream-compositions which have almost exclusively attracted the attention of the
writers on the subject. But it will repay us if we give some time to the examination of these simple dreams. The simplest dreams of all are, I
suppose, to be expected in the case of children whose psychic activities are certainly less complicated than those of adults. Child psychology, in
my opinion, is destined to render the same services to the psychology of adults as a study of the structure or development of the lower animals 
renders to the investigation of the structure of the higher orders of animals. Hitherto but few deliberate efforts have been made to make use of the
psychology of the child for such a purpose.
The dreams of little children are often simple fulfilments of wishes, and for this reason are, as compared with the dreams of adults, by no means
interesting. They present no problem to be solved, but they are invaluable as affording proof that the dream, in its inmost essence, is the fulfilment
of a wish. I have been able to collect several examples of such dreams from the material furnished by my own children.
For two dreams, one that of a daughter of mine, at that time eight and a half years of age, and the other that of a boy of five and a quarter, I am
indebted to an excursion to Hallstatt, in the summer of 1806. I must first explain that we were living that summer on a hill near Aussee, from
which, when the weather was fine, we enjoyed a splendid view of the Dachstein. With a telescope we could easily distinguish the Simony hut.
The children often tried to see it through the telescope - I do not know with what success. Before the excursion I had told the children that
Hallstatt lay at the foot of the Dachstein. They looked forward to the outing with the greatest delight. From Hallstatt we entered the valley of
Eschern, which enchanted the children with its constantly changing scenery. One of them, however, the boy of five, gradually became
discontented. As often as a mountain came into view, he would ask: "Is that the Dachstein?" whereupon I had to reply: "No, only a foot-hill."
After this question had been repeated several times he fell quite silent, and did not wish to accompany us up the steps leading to the waterfall. I
thought he was tired. But the next morning he came to me, perfectly happy, and said: "Last night I dreamt that we went to the Simony hut." I
understood him now; he had expected, when I spoke of the Dachstein, that on our excursion to Hallstatt he would climb the mountain, and would
see at close quarters the hut which had been so often mentioned when the telescope was used. When he learned that he was expected to content
himself with foot-hills and a waterfall he was disappointed, and became discontented. But the dream compensated him for all this. I tried to learn
some details of the dream; they were scanty. "You go up steps for six hours," as he had been told.
On this excursion the girl of eight and a half had likewise cherished wishes which had to be satisfied by a dream. We had taken with us to
Hallstatt our neighbour's twelve-year-old boy; quite a polished little gentleman, who, it seemed to me, had already won the little woman's
sympathies. Next morning she related the following dream: "Just think, I dreamt that Emil was one of the family, that he said 'papa' and 'mamma'
to you, and slept at our house, in the big room, like one of the boys. Then mamma came into the room and threw a handful of big bars of
chocolate, wrapped in blue and green paper, under our beds." The girl's brothers, who evidently had not inherited an understanding of dreaminterpretation, declared, just as the writers we have quoted would have done: "That dream is nonsense." The girl defended at least one part of the
dream, and from the standpoint of the theory of the neuroses it is interesting to learn which part it was that she defended: "That Emil was one of
the family was nonsense, but that about the bars of chocolate wasn't." It was just this latter part that was obscure to me, until my wife furnished
the explanation. On the way home from the railway-station the children had stopped in front of a slot-machine, and had wanted exactly such bars
of chocolate, wrapped in paper with a metallic lustre, such as the machine, in their experience, provided. But the mother thought, and rightly so,
that the day had brought them enough wish-fulfilments, and therefore left this wish to be satisfied in the dream. This little scene had escaped me.
That portion of the dream which had been condemned by my daughter I understood without any difficulty. I myself had heard the well-behaved
little guest enjoining the children, as they were walking ahead of us, to wait until "papa" or "mamma" had come up. For the little girl the dream
turned this temporary relationship into a permanent adoption. Her affection could not as yet conceive of any other way of enjoying her friend's
company permanently than the adoption pictured in her dream, which was suggested by her brothers. Why the bars of chocolate were thrown
under the bed could not, of course, be explained without questioning the child.
From a friend I have learned of a dream very much like that of my little boy. It was dreamed by a little girl of eight. Her father, accompanied by
several children, had started on a walk to Dornbach, with the intention of visiting the Rohrer hut, but had turned back, as it was growing late,
promising the children to take them some other time. On the way back they passed a signpost which pointed to the Hameau. The children now
asked him to take them to the Hameau, but once more, and for the same reason, they had to be content with the promise that they should go there
some other day. Next morning the little girl went to her father and told him, with a satisfied air: "Papa, I dreamed last night that you were with us
at the Rohrer hut, and on the Hameau." Thus, in the dream her impatience had anticipated the fulfilment of the promise made by her father.
Another dream, with which the picturesque beauty of the Aussee inspired my daughter, at that time three and a quarter years of age, is equally
straightforward. The little girl had crossed the lake for the first time, and the trip had passed too quickly for her. She did not want to leave the boat
at the landing, and cried bitterly. The next morning she told us: "Last night I was sailing on the lake." Let us hope that the duration of this dreamvoyage was more satisfactory to her.
My eldest boy, at that time eight years of age, was already dreaming of the realization of his fancies. He had ridden in a chariot with Achilles,
with Diomedes as charioteer. On the previous day he had shown a lively interest in a book on the myths of Greece which had been given to his
elder sister.
If it can be admitted that the talking of children in their sleep belongs to the sphere of dreams, I can relate the following as one of the earliest
dreams in my collection: My youngest daughter, at that time nineteen months old, vomited one morning, and was therefore kept without food all
day. During the night she was heard to call excitedly in her sleep: "Anna F(r)eud, St'awbewy, wild st'awbewy, om'lette, pap!" She used her name
in this way in order to express the act of appropriation; the menu presumably included everything that would seem to her a desirable meal; the
fact that two varieties of strawberry appeared in it was demonstration against the sanitary regulations of the household, and was based on the
circumstance, which she had by no means overlooked, that the nurse had ascribed her indisposition to an over-plentiful consumption of 
strawberries; so in her dream she avenged herself for this opinion which met with her disapproval.[2]
When we call childhood happy because it does not yet know sexual desire, we must not forget what a fruitful source of disappointment and
renunciation, and therefore of dream-stimulation, the other great vital impulse may be for the child.[3] Here is a second example. My nephew,
twenty-two months of age, had been instructed to congratulate me on my birthday, and to give me a present of a small basket of cherries, which at
that time of the year were scarce, being hardly in season. He seemed to find the task a difficult one, for he repeated again and again: "Cherries in
it," and could not be induced to let the little basket go out of his hands. But he knew how to indemnify himself. He had, until then, been in the
habit of telling his mother every morning that he had dreamt of the "white soldier," an officer of the guard in a white cloak, whom he had once
admired in the street. On the day after the sacrifice on my birthday he woke up joyfully with the announcement, which could have referred only to
a dream: "He [r] man eaten all the cherries!"[4]
What animals dream of I do not know. A proverb, for which I am indebted to one of my pupils, professes to tell us, for it asks the question: "What
does the goose dream of?" and answers: "Of maize."[5] The whole theory that the dream is the fulfilment of a wish is contained in these two
sentences.[6]
We now perceive that we should have reached our theory of the hidden meaning of dreams by the shortest route had we merely consulted the
vernacular. Proverbial wisdom, it is true, often speaks contemptuously enough of dreams - it apparently seeks to justify the scientists when it says
that "dreams are bubbles"; but in colloquial language the dream is predominantly the gracious fulfiller of wishes. "I should never have imagined
that in my wildest dreams," we exclaim in delight if we find that the reality surpasses our expectations. 



If I now declare that wish-fulfilment is the meaning of every dream, so that there cannot be any dreams other than wish-dreams, I know
beforehand that I shall meet with the most emphatic contradiction. My critics will object: "The fact that there are dreams which are to be
understood as fulfilments of wishes is not new, but has long since been recognized by such writers as Radestock, Volkelt, Purkinje, Griesinger
and others.[1] That there can be no other dreams than those of wish-fulfilments is yet one more unjustified generalization, which, fortunately, can
be easily refuted. Dreams which present the most painful content, and not the least trace of wish-fulfilment, occur frequently enough. The
pessimistic philosopher, Eduard von Hartmann, is perhaps most completely opposed to the theory of wish-fulfilment. In his Philosophy of the
Unconscious, Part II (Stereotyped German edition, p. 344), he says: 'As regards the dream, with it all the troubles of waking life pass over into the
sleeping state; all save the one thing which may in some degree reconcile the cultured person with life - scientific and artistic enjoyment....' But
even less pessimistic observers have emphasized the fact that in our dreams pain and disgust are more frequent than pleasure (Scholz, p. 33;
Volkelt, p. 80, et al.). Two ladies, Sarah Weed and Florence Hallam, have even worked out, on the basis of their dreams, a numerical value for the
preponderance of distress and discomfort in dreams. They find that 58 per cent of dreams are disagreeable, and only 28.6 positively pleasant.
Besides those dreams that convey into our sleep the many painful emotions of life, there are also anxiety-dreams, in which this most terrible of all
the painful emotions torments us until we wake. Now it is precisely by these anxiety dreams that children are so often haunted (cf. Debacker on
Pavor nocturnus); and yet it was in children that you found the wish-fulfilment dream in its most obvious form."
The anxiety-dream does really seem to preclude a generalization of the thesis deduced from the examples given in the last chapter, that dreams
are wish-fulfilments, and even to condemn it as an absurdity.
Nevertheless, it is not difficult to parry these apparently invincible objections. It is merely necessary to observe that our doctrine is not based
upon the estimates of the obvious dream-content, but relates to the thought-content, which, in the course of interpretation, is found to lie behind
the dream. Let us compare and contrast the manifest and the latent dream-content. It is true that there are dreams the manifest content of which is
of the most painful nature. But has anyone ever tried to interpret these dreams - to discover their latent thought-content? If not, the two objections
to our doctrine are no longer valid; for there is always the possibility that even our painful and terrifying dreams may, upon interpretation, prove
to be wish fulfilments. [2]
In scientific research it is often advantageous, if the solution of one problem presents difficulties, to add to it a second problem; just as it is easier
to crack two nuts together instead of separately. Thus, we are confronted not only with the problem: How can painful and terrifying dreams be the
fulfilments of wishes? but we may add to this a second problem which arises from the foregoing discussion of the general problem of the dream:
Why do not the dreams that show an indifferent content, and yet turn out to be wish-fulfilments, reveal their meaning without disguise? Take the
exhaustively treated dream of Irma's injection: it is by no means of a painful character, and it may be recognized, upon interpretation, as a striking
wish-fulfilment. But why is an interpretation necessary at all? Why does not the dream say directly what it means? As a matter of fact, the dream
of Irma's injection does not at first produce the impression that it represents a wish of the dreamer's as fulfilled. The reader will not have received
this impression, and even I myself was not aware of the fact until I had undertaken the analysis. If we call this peculiarity of dreams - namely, that 
they need elucidation - the phenomenon of distortion in dreams, a second question then arises: What is the origin of this distortion in dreams?
If one's first thoughts on this subject were consulted, several possible solutions might suggest themselves: for example, that during sleep one is
incapable of finding an adequate expression for one's dream-thoughts. The analysis of certain dreams, however, compels us to offer another
explanation. I shall demonstrate this by means of a second dream of my own, which again involves numerous indiscretions, but which
compensates for this personal sacrifice by affording a thorough elucidation of the problem.
Preliminary Statement
In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two professors of our university had proposed me for the title of Professor Extraordinarius (assistant professor).
The news came as a surprise to me, and pleased me considerably as an expression of appreciation on the part of two eminent men which could not
be explained by personal interest. But I told myself immediately that I must not expect anything to come of their proposal. For some years past
the Ministry had disregarded such proposals, and several colleagues of mine, who were my seniors and at least my equals in desert, had been
waiting in vain all this time for the appointment. I had no reason to suppose that I should fare any better. I resolved, therefore, to resign myself to
disappointment. I am not, so far as I know, ambitious, and I was following my profession with gratifying success even without the
recommendation of a professorial title. Whether I considered the grapes to be sweet or sour did not matter, since they undoubtedly hung too high
for me.
One evening a friend of mine called to see me; one of those colleagues whose fate I had regarded as a warning. As he had long been a candidate
for promotion to the professorate (which in our society makes the doctor a demigod to his patients), and as he was less resigned than I, he was
accustomed from time to time to remind the authorities of his claims in the hope of advancing his interests. It was after one of these visits that he
called on me. He said that this time he had driven the exalted gentleman into a corner, and had asked him frankly whether considerations of
religious denomination were not really responsible for the postponement of his appointment. The answer was: His Excellency had to admit that in
the present state of public opinion he was not in a position, etc. "Now at least I know where I stand," my friend concluded his narrative, which
told me nothing new, but which was calculated to confirm me in my resignation. For the same denominational considerations would apply to my
own case.
On the morning after my friend's visit I had the following dream, which was notable also on account of its form. It consisted of two thoughts and
two images, so that a thought and an image emerged alternately. But here I shall record only the first half of the dream, since the second half has
no relation to the purpose for which I cite the dream.
I. My friend R is my uncle - I have a great affection for him.
II. I see before me his face, somewhat altered. It seems to be elongated; a yellow beard, which surrounds it, is seen with peculiar distinctness.
Then follow the other two portions of the dream, again a thought and an image, which I omit.
The interpretation of this dream was arrived at in the following manner:
When I recollected the dream in the course of the morning, I laughed outright and said, "The dream is nonsense." But I could not get it out of my
mind, and I was pursued by it all day, until at last, in the evening, I reproached myself in these words: "If in the course of a dream-interpretation
one of your patients could find nothing better to say than 'That is nonsense,' you would reprove him, and you would suspect that behind the dream
there was hidden some disagreeable affair, the exposure of which he wanted to spare himself. Apply the same thing to your own case; your
opinion that the dream is nonsense probably signifies merely an inner resistance to its interpretation. Don't let yourself be put off." I then
proceeded with the interpretation.
R is my uncle. What can that mean? I had only one uncle, my uncle Joseph.[3] His story, to be sure, was a sad one. Once, more than thirty years
ago, hoping to make money, he allowed himself to be involved in transactions of a kind which the law punishes severely, and paid the penalty.
My father, whose hair turned grey with grief within a few days, used always to say that uncle Joseph had never been a bad man, but, after all, he
was a simpleton. If, then, my friend R is my uncle Joseph, that is equivalent to saying: "R is a simpleton." Hardly credible, and very disagreeable!
But there is the face that I saw in the dream, with its elongated features and its yellow beard. My uncle actually had such a face - long, and framed
in a handsome yellow beard. My friend R was extremely swarthy, but when black-haired people begin to grow grey they pay for the glory of their
youth. Their black beards undergo an unpleasant change of colour, hair by hair; first they turn a reddish brown, then a yellowish brown, and then
definitely grey. My friend R's beard is now in this stage; so, for that matter, is my own, a fact which I note with regret. The face that I see in my
dream is at once that of my friend R and that of my uncle. It is like one of those composite photographs of Galton's; in order to emphasize family
resemblances Galton had several faces photographed on the same plate. No doubt is now possible; it is really my opinion that my friend R is a
simpleton - like my uncle Joseph.
I have still no idea for what purpose I have worked out this relationship. It is certainly one to which I must unreservedly object. Yet it is not very 
profound, for my uncle was a criminal, and my friend R is not, except in so far as he was once fined for knocking down an apprentice with his
bicycle. Can I be thinking of this offence? That would make the comparison ridiculous. Here I recollect another conversation, which I had some
days ago with another colleague, N; as a matter of fact, on the same subject. I met N in the street; he, too, has been nominated for a professorship,
and having heard that I had been similarly honoured he congratulated me. I refused his congratulations, saying: "You are the last man to jest aboutthe matter, for you know from your own experience what the nomination is worth." Thereupon he said, though probably not in earnest; "You can't
be sure of that. There is a special objection in my case. Don't you know that a woman once brought a criminal accusation against me? I need
hardly assure you that the matter was put right. It was a mean attempt at blackmail, and it was all I could do to save the plaintiff from punishment.
But it may be that the affair is remembered against me at the Ministry. You, on the other hand, are above reproach." Here, then, I have the
criminal, and at the same time the interpretation and tendency of my dream. My uncle Joseph represents both of my colleagues who have not been
appointed to the professorship - the one as a simpleton, the other as a criminal. Now, too, I know for what purpose I need this representation. If
denominational considerations are a determining factor in the postponement of my two friends' appointment, then my own appointment is
likewise in jeopardy. But if I can refer the rejection of my two friends to other causes, which do not apply to my own case, my hopes are
unaffected. This is the procedure followed by my dream: it makes the one friend R, a simpleton, and the other, N, a criminal. But since I am
neither one nor the other, there is nothing in common between us. I have a right to enjoy my appointment to the title of professor, and have
avoided the distressing application to my own case of the information which the official gave to my friend R.
I must pursue the interpretation of this dream still farther; for I have a feeling that it is not yet satisfactorily elucidated. I still feel disquieted by the
ease with which I have degraded two respected colleagues in order to clear my own way to the professorship. My dissatisfaction with this
procedure has, of course, been mitigated since I have learned to estimate the testimony of dreams at its true value. I should contradict anyone who
suggested that I really considered R a simpleton, or that I did not believe N's account of the blackmailing incident. And of course I do not believe
that Irma has been made seriously ill by an injection of a preparation of propyl administered by Otto. Here, as before, what the dream expresses is
only my wish that things might be so. The statement in which my wish is realized sounds less absurd in the second dream than in the first; it is
here made with a skilful use of actual points of support in establishing something like a plausible slander, one of which one could say that "there
is something in it." For at that time my friend R had to contend with the adverse vote of a university professor of his own department, and my
friend N had himself, all unsuspectingly, provided me with material for the calumny. Nevertheless, I repeat, it still seems to me that the dream
requires further elucidation.
I remember now that the dream contained yet another portion which has hitherto been ignored by the interpretation. After it occurred to me that
my friend R was my uncle, I felt in the dream a great affection for him. To whom is this feeling directed? For my uncle Joseph, of course, I have
never had any feelings of affection. R has for many years been a dearly loved friend, but if I were to go to him and express my affection for him
in terms approaching the degree of affection which I felt in the dream, he would undoubtedly be surprised. My affection, if it was for him, seems
false and exaggerated, as does my judgment of his intellectual qualities, which I expressed by merging his personality in that of my uncle; but
exaggerated in the opposite direction. Now, however, a new state of affairs dawns upon me. The affection in the dream does not belong to the
latent content, to the thoughts behind the dream; it stands in opposition to this content; it is calculated to conceal the knowledge conveyed by the
interpretation. Probably this is precisely its function. I remember with what reluctance I undertook the interpretation, how long I tried to postpone
it, and how I declared the dream to be sheer nonsense. I know from my psycho-analytic practice how such a condemnation is to be interpreted. It
has no informative value, but merely expresses an affect. If my little daughter does not like an apple which is offered her, she asserts that the
apple is bitter, without even tasting it. If my patients behave thus, I know that we are dealing with an idea which they are trying to repress. The
same thing applies to my dream. I do not want to interpret it because there is something in the interpretation to which I object. After the
interpretation of the dream is completed, I discover what it was to which I objected; it was the assertion that R is a simpleton. I can refer the
affection which I feel for R not to the latent dream-thoughts, but rather to this unwillingness of mine. If my dream, as compared with its latent
content, is disguised at this point, and actually misrepresents things by producing their opposites, then the manifest affection in the dream serves
the purpose of the misrepresentation: in other words, the distortion is here shown to be intentional - it is a means of disguise. My dream-thoughts
of R are derogatory, and so that I may not become aware of this the very opposite of defamation - a tender affection for him - enters into the
dream.
This discovery may prove to be generally valid. As the examples in Chapter III have demonstrated, there are, of course, dreams which are
undisguised wish-fulfilments. Wherever a wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable and disguised there must be present a tendency to defend oneself
against this wish, and in consequence of this defence the wish is unable to express itself save in a distorted form. I will try to find a parallel in
social life to this occurrence in the inner psychic life. Where in social life can a similar misrepresentation be found? Only where two persons are
concerned, one of whom possesses a certain power while the other has to act with a certain consideration on account of this power. The second
person will then distort his psychic actions: or, as we say, he will mask himself. The politeness which I practise every day is largely a disguise of
this kind; if I interpret my dreams for the benefit of my readers, I am forced to make misrepresentations of this kind. The poet even complains of
the necessity of such misrepresentation: Das Beste, was du wissen kannst, darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen: "The best that thou canst know
thou mayst not tell to boys."
The political writer who has unpleasant truths to tell to those in power finds himself in a like position. If he tells everything without reserve, the
Government will suppress them - retrospectively in the case of a verbal expression of opinion, preventively if they are to be published in the
Press. The writer stands in fear of the censorship; he therefore moderates and disguises the expression of his opinions. He finds himself
compelled, in accordance with the sensibilities of the censor, either to refrain altogether from certain forms of attack or to express himself in 
allusions instead of by direct assertions; or he must conceal his objectionable statement in an apparently innocent disguise. He may, for instance,
tell of a contretemps between two Chinese mandarins, while he really has in mind the officials of his own country. The stricter the domination of
the censorship, the more thorough becomes the disguise, and, often enough, the more ingenious the means employed to put the reader on the track
of the actual meaning.
The detailed correspondence between the phenomena of censorship and the phenomena of dream-distortion justifies us in presupposing similar
conditions for both. We should then assume that in every human being there exist, as the primary cause of dream-formation, two psychic forces
(tendencies or systems), one of which forms the wish expressed by the dream, while the other exercises a censorship over this dream-wish,
thereby enforcing on it a distortion. The question is: What is the nature of the authority of this second agency by virtue of which it is able to
exercise its censorship? If we remember that the latent dream-thoughts are not conscious before analysis, but that the manifest dream-content
emerging from them is consciously remembered, it is not a far-fetched assumption that admittance to the consciousness is the prerogative of the
second agency. Nothing can reach the consciousness from the first system which has not previously passed the second instance; and the second
instance lets nothing pass without exercising its rights, and forcing such modifications as are pleasing to itself upon the candidates for admission
to consciousness. Here we arrive at a very definite conception of the essence of consciousness; for us the state of becoming conscious is a special
psychic act, different from and independent of the process of becoming fixed or represented, and consciousness appears to us as a sensory organ
which perceives a content proceeding from another source. It may be shown that psycho-pathology simply cannot dispense with these
fundamental assumptions. But we shall reserve for another time a more exhaustive examination of the subject.
If I bear in mind the notion of the two psychic instances and their relation to the consciousness, I find in the sphere of politics a perfectly
appropriate analogy to the extraordinary affection which I feel for my friend R, who is so disparaged in the dream-interpretation. I refer to the
political life of a State in which the ruler, jealous of his rights, and an active public opinion are in mutual conflict. The people, protesting against
the actions of an unpopular official, demand his dismissal. The autocrat, on the other hand, in order to show his contempt for the popular will,
may then deliberately confer upon the official some exceptional distinction which otherwise would not have been conferred. Similarly, my second
instance, controlling the access to my consciousness, distinguishes my friend R with a rush of extraordinary affection, because the wishtendencies of the first system, in view of a particular interest on which they are just then intent, would like to disparage him as a simpleton.[4]
We may now perhaps begin to suspect that dream-interpretation is capable of yielding information concerning the structure of our psychic
apparatus which we have hitherto vainly expected from philosophy. We shall not, however, follow up this trail, but shall return to our original
problem as soon as we have elucidated the problem of dream-distortion. The question arose, how dreams with a disagreeable content can be
analysed as wish-fulfillments. We see now that this is possible where a dream-distortion has occurred, when the disagreeable content serves only
to disguise the thing wished for. With regard to our assumptions respecting the two psychic instances, we can now also say that disagreeable
dreams contain, as a matter of fact, something which is disagreeable to the second instance, but which at the same time fulfills a wish of the first
instance. They are wish-dreams in so far as every dream emanates from the first instance, while the second instance behaves towards the dream
only in a defensive, not in a constructive manner.[5] Were we to limit ourselves to a consideration of what the second instance contributes to the
dream we should never understand the dream, and all the problems which the writers on the subject have discovered in the dream would have to
remain unsolved.
That the dream actually has a secret meaning, which proves to be a wish-fulfillment, must be proved afresh in every case by analysis. I will
therefore select a few dreams which have painful contents, and endeavour to analyse them. Some of them are dreams of hysterical subjects, which
therefore call for a long preliminary statement, and in some passages an examination of the psychic processes occurring in hysteria. This, though
it will complicate the presentation, is unavoidable.
When I treat a psychoneurotic patient analytically, his dreams regularly, as I have said, become a theme of our conversations. I must therefore
give him all the psychological explanations with whose aid I myself have succeeded in understanding his symptoms. And here I encounter
unsparing criticism, which is perhaps no less shrewd than that which I have to expect from my colleagues. With perfect uniformity, my patients
contradict the doctrine that dreams are the fulfillments of wishes. Here are several examples of the sort of dream-material which is adduced in
refutation of my theory.
"You are always saying that a dream is a wish fulfilled," begins an intelligent lady patient. "Now I shall tell you a dream in which the content is
quite the opposite, in which a wish of mine is not fulfilled. How do you reconcile that with your theory? The dream was as follows: I want to give
a supper, but I have nothing available except some smoked salmon. I think I will go shopping, but I remember that it is Sunday afternoon, when
all the shops are closed. I then try to ring up a few caterers, but the telephone is out of order. Accordingly I have to renounce my desire to give a
supper."
I reply, of course, that only the analysis can decide the meaning of this dream, although I admit that at first sight it seems sensible and coherent
and looks like the opposite of a wish-fulfilment. "But what occurrence gave rise to this dream?" I ask. "You know that the stimulus of a dream
always lies among the experiences of the preceding day."
Analysis 
The patient's husband, an honest and capable meat salesman, had told her the day before that he was growing too fat, and that he meant to
undergo treatment for obesity. He would rise early, take physical exercise, keep to a strict diet, and above all accept no more invitations to supper.
She proceeds jestingly to relate how her husband, at a table d'hote, had made the acquaintance of an artist, who insisted upon painting his portrait,
because he, the painter, had never seen such an expressive head. But her husband had answered in his downright fashion, that while he was much
obliged, he would rather not be painted; and he was quite convinced that a bit of a pretty girl's posterior would please the artist better than his
whole face.[6] She is very much in love with her husband, and teases him a good deal. She has asked him not to give her any caviar. What can
that mean?
Goethe: And if he has no backside, How can the nobleman sit?
As a matter of fact, she had wanted for a long time to eat a caviar sandwich every morning, but had grudged the expense. Of course she could get
the caviar from her husband at once if she asked for it. But she has, on the contrary, begged him not to give her any caviar, so that she might tease
him about it a little longer.
(To me this explanation seems thin. Unconfessed motives are wont to conceal themselves behind just such unsatisfying explanations. We are
reminded of the subjects hypnotized by Bernheim, who carried out a post-hypnotic order, and who, on being questioned as to their motives,
instead of answering: "I do not know why I did that." had to invent a reason that was obviously inadequate. There is probably something similar
to this in the case of my patient's caviar. I see that in waking life she is compelled to invent an unfulfilled wish. Her dream also shows her the nonfulfillment of her wish. But why does she need an unfulfilled wish?)
The ideas elicited so far are insufficient for the interpretation of the dream. I press for more. After a short pause, which corresponds to the
overcoming of a resistance, she reports that the day before she had paid a visit to a friend of whom she is really jealous because her husband is
always praising this lady so highly. Fortunately this friend is very thin and lanky, and her husband likes full figures. Now of what did this thin
friend speak? Of course, of her wish to become rather plumper. She also asked my patient: "When are you going to invite us again? You always
have such good food."
Now the meaning of the dream is clear. I am able to tell the patient: "It is just as though you had thought at the moment of her asking you that: 'Of
course, I'm to invite you so that you can eat at my house and get fat and become still more pleasing to my husband! I would rather give no more
suppers!' The dream then tells you that you cannot give a supper, thereby fulfilling your wish not to contribute anything to the rounding out of
your friend's figure. Your husband's resolution to accept no more invitations to supper in order that he may grow thin teaches you that one grows
fat on food eaten at other people's tables." Nothing is lacking now but some sort of coincidence which will confirm the solution. The smoked
salmon in the dream has not yet been traced. - "How did you come to think of salmon in your dream?" - "Smoked salmon is my friend's favourite
dish," she replied. It happens that I know the lady, and am able to affirm that she grudges herself salmon just as my patient grudges herself caviar.
This dream admits of yet another and more exact interpretation - one which is actually necessitated only by a subsidiary circumstance. The two
interpretations do not contradict one another, but rather dovetail into one another, and furnish an excellent example of the usual ambiguity of
dreams, as of all other psycho-pathological formations. We have heard that at the time of her dream of a denied wish the patient was impelled to
deny herself a real wish (the wish to cat caviar sandwiches). Her friend, too, had expressed a wish, namely, to get fatter, and it would not surprise
us if our patient had dreamt that this wish of her friend's - the wish to increase in weight - was not to be fulfilled. Instead of this, however, she
dreamt that one of her own wishes was not fulfilled. The dream becomes capable of a new interpretation if in the dream she does not mean
herself, but her friend, if she has put herself in the place of her friend, or, as we may say, has identified herself with her friend.
I think she has actually done this, and as a sign of this identification she has created for herself in real life an unfulfilled wish. But what is the
meaning of this hysterical identification? To elucidate this a more exhaustive exposition is necessary. Identification is a highly important motive
in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms; by this means patients are enabled to express in their symptoms not merely their own experiences, but
the experiences of quite a number of other persons; they can suffer, as it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a drama with
their own personalities. It will here be objected that this is the well-known hysterical imitation, the ability of hysterical subjects to imitate all the
symptoms which impress them when they occur in others, as though pity were aroused to the point of reproduction. This, however, only indicates
the path which the psychic process follows in hysterical imitation. But the path itself and the psychic act which follows this path are two different
matters. The act itself is slightly more complicated than we are prone to believe the imitation of the hysterical to be; it corresponds to an
unconscious end-process, as an example will show. The physician who has, in the same ward with other patients, a female patient suffering from
a particular kind of twitching, is not surprised if one morning he learns that this peculiar hysterical affection has found imitators. He merely tells
himself: The others have seen her, and have imitated her; this is psychic infection. Yes, but psychic infection occurs somewhat in the following
manner: As a rule, patients know more about one another than the physician knows about any one of them, and they are concerned about one
another when the doctor's visit is over. One of them has an attack to-day: at once it is known to the rest that a letter from home, a recrudescence of
lovesickness, or the like, is the cause. Their sympathy is aroused, and although it does not emerge into consciousness they form the following
conclusion: "If it is possible to suffer such an attack from such a cause, I too may suffer this sort of an attack, for I have the same occasion for it."
If this were a conclusion capable of becoming conscious, it would perhaps express itself in dread of suffering a like attack; but it is formed in
another psychic region, and consequently ends in the realization of the dreaded symptoms. Thus identification is not mere imitation, but an 
assimilation based upon the same aetiological claim; it expresses a just like, and refers to some common condition which has remained in the
unconscious.
In hysteria, identification is most frequently employed to express a sexual community. The hysterical woman identifies herself by her symptoms
most readily - though not exclusively - with persons with whom she has had sexual relations, or who have had sexual intercourse with the same
persons as herself. Language takes cognizance of this tendency: two lovers are said to be "one." In hysterical phantasy, as well as in dreams,
identification may ensue if one simply thinks of sexual relations; they need not necessarily become actual. The patient is merely following the
rules of the hysterical processes of thought when she expresses her jealousy of her friend (which, for that matter, she herself admits to be
unjustified) by putting herself in her friend's place in her dream, and identifying herself with her by fabricating a symptom (the denied wish). One
might further elucidate the process by saying: In the dream she puts herself in the place of her friend, because her friend has taken her own place
in relation to her husband, and because she would like to take her friend's place in her husband's esteem.[7] -
The contradiction of my theory of dreams on the part of another female patient, the most intelligent of all my dreamers, was solved in a simpler
fashion, though still in accordance with the principle that the non-fulfilment of one wish signified the fulfilment of another. I had one day
explained to her that a dream is a wish-fulfilment. On the following day she related a dream to the effect that she was travelling with her motherin-law to the place in which they were both to spend the summer. Now I knew that she had violently protested against spending the summer in the
neighbourhood of her mother-in-law. I also knew that she had fortunately been able to avoid doing so, since she had recently succeeded in renting
a house in a place quite remote from that to which her mother-in-law was going. And now the dream reversed this desired solution. Was not this a
flat contradiction of my theory of wish-fulfilment? One had only to draw the inferences from this dream in order to arrive at its interpretation.
According to this dream, I was wrong; but it was her wish that I should be wrong, and this wish the dream showed her as fulfilled. But the wish
that I should be wrong, which was fulfilled in the theme of the country house, referred in reality to another and more serious matter. At that time I
had inferred, from the material furnished by her analysis, that something of significance in respect to her illness must have occurred at a certain
time in her life. She had denied this, because it was not present in her memory. We soon came to see that I was right. Thus her wish that I should
prove to be wrong, which was transformed into the dream that she was going into the country with her mother-in-law, corresponded with the
justifiable wish that those things which were then only suspected had never occurred.
Without an analysis, and merely by means of an assumption, I took the liberty of interpreting a little incident in the life of a friend, who had been
my companion through eight classes at school. He once heard a lecture of mine, delivered to a small audience, on the novel idea that dreams are
wish-fulfilments. He went home, dreamt that he had lost all his lawsuits - he was a lawyer - and then complained to me about it. I took refuge in
the evasion: "One can't win all one's cases"; but I thought to myself: "If, for eight years, I sat as primus on the first bench, while he moved up and
down somewhere in the middle of the class, may he not naturally have had the wish, ever since his boyhood, that I too might for once make a fool
of myself?"
Yet another dream of a more gloomy character was offered me by a female patient in contradiction of my theory of the wish-dream. This patient,
a young girl, began as follows: "You remember that my sister has now only one boy, Charles. She lost the elder one, Otto, while I was still living
with her. Otto was my favourite; it was I who really brought him up. I like the other little fellow, too, but, of course, not nearly as much as his
dead brother. Now I dreamt last night that I saw Charles lying dead before me. He was lying in his little coffin, his hands folded; there were
candles all about; and, in short, it was just as it was at the time of little Otto's death, which gave me such a shock. Now tell me, what does this
mean? You know me - am I really so bad as to wish that my sister should lose the only child she has left? Or does the dream mean that I wish that
Charles had died rather than Otto, whom I liked so much better?"
I assured her that this latter interpretation was impossible. After some reflection, I was able to give her the interpretation of the dream, which she
subsequently confirmed. I was able to do so because the whole previous history of the dreamer was known to me.
Having become an orphan at an early age, the girl had been brought up in the home of a much older sister, and had met, among the friends and
visitors who frequented the house, a man who made a lasting impression upon her affections. It looked for a time as though these barely explicit
relations would end in marriage, but this happy culmination was frustrated by the sister, whose motives were never completely explained. After
the rupture the man whom my patient loved avoided the house; she herself attained her independence some time after the death of little Otto, to
whom, meanwhile, her affections had turned. But she did not succeed in freeing herself from the dependence due to her affection for her sister's
friend. Her pride bade her avoid him, but she found it impossible to transfer her love to the other suitors who successively presented themselves.
Whenever the man she loved, who was a member of the literary profession, announced a lecture anywhere, she was certain to be found among the
audience; and she seized every other opportunity of seeing him unobserved. I remembered that on the previous day she had told me that the
Professor was going to a certain concert, and that she too was going, in order to enjoy the sight of him. This was on the day before the dream; and
the concert was to be given on the day on which she told me the dream. I could now easily see the correct interpretation, and I asked her whether
she could think of any particular event which had occurred after Otto's death. She replied immediately: "Of course; the Professor returned then,
after a long absence, and I saw him once more beside little Otto's coffin." It was just as I had expected. I interpreted the dream as follows: "If now
the other boy were to die, the same thing would happen again. You would spend the day with your sister; the Professor would certainly come to
offer his condolences, and you would see him once more under the same circumstances as before. The dream signifies nothing more than this
wish of yours to see him again - a wish against which you are fighting inwardly. I know that you have the ticket for today's concert in your bag.
Your dream is a dream of impatience; it has anticipated by several hours the meeting which is to take place to-day." 
In order to disguise her wish she had obviously selected a situation in which wishes of the sort are commonly suppressed - a situation so
sorrowful that love is not even thought of. And yet it is entirely possible that even in the actual situation beside the coffin of the elder, more
dearly loved boy, she had not been able to suppress her tender affection for the visitor whom she had missed for so long.
A different explanation was found in the case of a similar dream of another patient, who in earlier life had been distinguished for her quick wit
and her cheerful disposition, and who still displayed these qualities, at all events in the free associations which occurred to her during treatment.
In the course of a longer dream, it seemed to this lady that she saw her fifteen-year-old daughter lying dead before her in a box. She was strongly
inclined to use this dream-image as an objection to the theory of wish-fulfilment, although she herself suspected that the detail of the box must
lead to a different conception of the dream.[8] For in the course of the analysis it occurred to her that on the previous evening the conversation of
the people in whose company she found herself had turned on the English word box, and upon the numerous translations of it into German such
as Schachtel (box), Loge (box at the theatre), Kasten (chest), Ohrfeige (box on the ear), etc. From other components of the same dream it was
now possible to add the fact that the lady had guessed at the relationship between the English word "box" and the German Buchse, and had then
been haunted by the recollection that Buchse is used in vulgar parlance to denote the female genitals. It was therefore possible, treating her
knowledge of topographical anatomy with a certain indulgence, to assume that the child in the box signified a child in the mother's womb. At this
stage of the explanation she no longer denied that the picture in the dream actually corresponded with a wish of hers. Like so many other young
women, she was by no means happy on finding that she was pregnant, and she had confessed to me more than once the wish that her child might
die before its birth; in a fit of anger, following a violent scene with her husband, she had even struck her abdomen with her fists, in order to injure
the child within. The dead child was therefore, really the fulfilment of a wish, but a wish which had been put aside for fifteen years, and it is not
surprising that the fulfilment of the wish was no longer recognized after so long an interval. For there had been many changes in the meantime.
The group of dreams (having as content the death of beloved relatives) to which belong the last two mentioned will be considered again under the
head of "Typical Dreams." I shall then be able to show by new examples that in spite of their undesirable content all these dreams must be
interpreted as wish - fulfilments. For the following dream, which again was told me in order to deter me from a hasty generalization of my theory,
I am indebted, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist of my acquaintance. "I dream," my informant tells me, "that I am walking in front of my
house with a lady on my arm. Here a closed carriage is waiting; a man steps up to me, shows me his authorization as a police officer, and requests
me to follow him. I ask only for time in which to arrange my affairs." The jurist then asks me: "Can you possibly suppose that it is my wish to be
arrested?" - "Of course not," I have to admit. "Do you happen to know upon what charge you were arrested?" - "Yes; I believe for infanticide." -
"Infanticide? But you know that only a mother can commit this crime upon her new-born child?" - "That is true."[9] "And under what
circumstances did you dream this? What happened on the evening before?" - "I would rather not tell you - it is a delicate matter." - "But I need it,
otherwise we must forgo the interpretation of the dream." - "Well, then, I will tell you. I spent the night, not at home, but in the house of a lady
who means a great deal to me. When we awoke in the morning, something again passed between us. Then I went to sleep again, and dreamt what
I have told you." - "The woman is married?" - "Yes." - "And you do not wish her to conceive?" - "No; that might betray us." - "Then you do not
practice normal coitus?" - "I take the precaution to withdraw before ejaculation." - "Am I to assume that you took this precaution several times
during the night, and that in the morning you were not quite sure whether you had succeeded?" - "That might be so." - "Then your dream is the
fulfilment of a wish. By the dream you are assured that you have not begotten a child, or, what amounts to the same thing, that you have killed the
child. I can easily demonstrate the connecting-links. Do you remember, a few days ago we were talking about the troubles of matrimony, and
about the inconsistency of permitting coitus so long as no impregnation takes place, while at the same time any preventive act committed after the
ovum and the semen meet and a foetus is formed is punished as a crime? In this connection we recalled the medieval controversy about the
moment of time at which the soul actually enters into the foetus, since the concept of murder becomes admissible only from that point onwards.
Of course, too, you know the gruesome poem by Lenau, which puts infanticide and birth-control on the same plane." - "Strangely enough, I
happened, as though by chance, to think of Lenau this morning." - "Another echo of your dream. And now I shall show you yet another incidental
wish-fulfilment in your dream. You walk up to your house with the lady on your arm. So you take her home, instead of spending the night at her
house, as you did in reality. The fact that the wish-fulfilment, which is the essence of the dream, disguises itself in such an unpleasant form, has
perhaps more than one explanation. From my essay on the aetiology of anxiety neurosis, you will see that I note coitus interruptus as one of the
factors responsible for the development of neurotic fear. It would be consistent with this if, after repeated coitus of this kind, you were left in an
uncomfortable frame of mind, which now becomes an element of the composition of your dream. You even make use of this uncomfortable state
of mind to conceal the wish-fulfilment. At the same time, the mention of infanticide has not yet been explained. Why does this crime, which is
peculiar to females, occur to you?" - "I will confess to you that I was involved in such an affair years ago. I was responsible for the fact that a girl
tried to protect herself from the consequences of a liaison with me by procuring an abortion. I had nothing to do with the carrying out of her plan,
but for a long time I was naturally worried in case the affair might be discovered." - "I understand. This recollection furnished a second reason
why the supposition that you had performed coitus interruptus clumsily must have been painful to you."
A young physician, who heard this dream related in my lecture-room, must have felt that it fitted him, for he hastened to imitate it by a dream of
his own, applying its mode of thinking to another theme. On the previous day he had furnished a statement of his income; a quite straightforward
statement, because he had little to state. He dreamt that an acquaintance of his came from a meeting of the tax commission and informed him that
all the other statements had passed unquestioned, but that his own had aroused general suspicion, with the result that he would be punished with a
heavy fine. This dream is a poorly disguised fulfilment of the wish to be known as a physician with a large income. It also calls to mind the story
of the young girl who was advised against accepting her suitor because he was a man of quick temper, who would assuredly beat her after their
marriage. Her answer was: "I wish he would strike me!" Her wish to be married was so intense that she had taken into consideration the 
discomforts predicted for this marriage; she had even raised them to the plane of a wish.
If I group together the very frequent dreams of this sort, which seem flatly to contradict my theory, in that they embody the denial of a wish or
some occurrence obviously undesired, under the head of counter-wish-dreams, I find that they may all be referred to two principles, one of which
has not yet been mentioned, though it plays a large part in waking as well as dream-life. One of the motives inspiring these dreams is the wish
that I should appear in the wrong. These dreams occur regularly in the course of treatment whenever the patient is in a state of resistance; indeed,
I can with a great degree of certainty count on evoking such a dream once I have explained to the patient my theory that the dream is a wishfulfilment.[10] Indeed, I have reason to expect that many of my readers will have such dreams, merely to fulfil the wish that I may prove to be
wrong. The last dream which I shall recount from among those occurring in the course of treatment once more demonstrates this very thing. A
young girl who had struggled hard to continue my treatment, against the will of her relatives and the authorities whom they had consulted, dreamt
the following dream: At home she is forbidden to come to me any more. She then reminds me of the promise I made her to treat her for nothing if
necessary, and I tell her: "I can show no consideration in money matters."
It is not at all easy in this case to demonstrate the fulfilment of a wish, but in all cases of this kind there is a second problem, the solution of which
helps also to solve the first. Where does she get the words which she puts into my mouth? Of course, I have never told her anything of the kind;
but one of her brothers, the one who has the greatest influence over her, has been kind enough to make this remark about me. It is then the
purpose of the dream to show that her brother is right; and she does not try to justify this brother merely in the dream; it is her purpose in life and
the motive of her illness.
A dream which at first sight presents peculiar difficulties for the theory of wish-fulfilment was dreamed by a physician (Aug. Starcke) and
interpreted by him: "I have and see on the last phalange of my left forefinger a primary syphilitic affection."
One may perhaps be inclined to refrain from analysing this dream, since it seems clear and coherent, except for its unwished-for content.
However, if one takes the trouble to make an analysis, one learns that primary affection reduces itself to prima affectio (first love), and that the
repulsive sore, in the words of Starcke, proves to be "the representative of wish-fulfilments charged with intense emotion." [11]
The other motive for counter-wish-dreams is so clear that there is a danger of overlooking it, as happened in my own case for a long time. In the
sexual constitution of many persons there is a masochistic component, which has arisen through the conversion of the aggressive, sadistic
component into its opposite. Such people are called ideal masochists if they seek pleasure not in the bodily pain which may be inflicted upon
them, but in humiliation and psychic chastisement. It is obvious that such persons may have counter-wish-dreams and disagreeable dreams, yet
these are for them nothing more than wish-fulfilments, which satisfy their masochistic inclinations. Here is such a dream: A young man, who in
earlier youth greatly tormented his elder brother, toward whom he was homosexually inclined, but who has since undergone a complete change of
character, has the following dream, which consists of three parts: (1) He is "teased" by his brother. (2) Two adults are caressing each other with
homosexual intentions. (3) His brother has sold the business the management of which the young man had reserved for his own future. From this
last dream he awakens with the most unpleasant feelings; and yet it is a masochistic wish-dream, which might be translated: It would serve me
right if my brother were to make that sale against my interests. It would be my punishment for all the torments he has suffered at my hands.
I hope that the examples given above will suffice - until some further objection appears - to make it seem credible that even dreams with a painful
content are to be analysed as wish-fulfilments.[12] Nor should it be considered a mere matter of chance that, in the course of interpretation, one
always happens upon subjects about which one does not like to speak or think. The disagreeable sensation which such dreams arouse is of course
precisely identical with the antipathy which would, and usually does, restrain us from treating or discussing such subjects - an antipathy which
must be overcome by all of us if we find ourselves obliged to attack the problem of such dreams. But this disagreeable feeling which recurs in our
dreams does not preclude the existence of a wish; everyone has wishes which he would not like to confess to others, which he does not care to
admit even to himself. On the other hand, we feel justified in connecting the unpleasant character of all these dreams with the fact of dreamdistortion, and in concluding that these dreams are distorted, and that their wish-fulfilment is disguised beyond recognition, precisely because
there is a strong revulsion against - a will to repress - the subject-matter of the dream, or the wish created by it. Dream-distortion, then, proves in
reality to be an act of censorship. We shall have included everything which the analysis of disagreeable dreams has brought to light if we reword
our formula thus: The dream is the (disguised) fulfilment of a (suppressed, repressed) wish.[13]
I will here anticipate by citing the amplification and modification of this fundamental formula propounded by Otto Rank: "On the basis of and
with the aid of repressed infantile-sexual material, dreams regularly represent as fulfilled current, and as a rule also erotic, wishes in a disguised
and symbolic form" (Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet).
Nowhere have I said that I have accepted this formula of Rank's. The shorter version contained in the text seems to me sufficient. But the fact that
I merely mentioned Rank's modification was enough to expose psycho-analysis to the oft-repeated reproach that it asserts that all dreams have a
sexual content. If one understands this sentence as it is intended to be understood, it only proves how little conscientiousness our critics are wont
to display, and how ready our opponents are to overlook statements if they do not accord with their aggressive inclinations. Only a few pages
back I mentioned the manifold wish-fulfilments of children's dreams (to make an excursion on land and or water, to make up for an omitted meal,
etc.). Elsewhere I have mentioned dreams excited by thirst and the desire to evacuate, and mere comfort - or convenience-dreams. Even Rank 
does not make an absolute assertion. He says "as a rule also erotic wishes," and this can be completely confirmed in the case of most dreams of
adults.
The matter has, however, a different aspect if we employ the word sexual in the sense of Eros, as the word is understood by psycho-analysts. But
the interesting problem of whether all dreams are not produced by libidinal motives (in opposition to destructive ones) has hardly been considered
by our opponents.
Now there still remain to be considered, as a particular sub-order of dreams with painful content, the anxiety-dreams, the inclusion of which
among the wish-dreams will be still less acceptable to the uninitiated. But I can here deal very cursorily with the problem of anxiety-dreams; what
they have to reveal is not a new aspect of the dream-problem; here the problem is that of understanding neurotic anxiety in general. The anxiety
which we experience in dreams is only apparently explained by the dream-content. If we subject that content to analysis, we become aware that
the dream-anxiety is no more justified by the dream-content than the anxiety in a phobia is justified by the idea to which the phobia is attached.
For example, it is true that it is possible to fall out of a window, and that a certain care should be exercised when one is at a window, but it is not
obvious why the anxiety in the corresponding phobia is so great, and why it torments its victims more than its cause would warrant. The same
explanation which applies to the phobia applies also to the anxiety-dream. In either case, the anxiety is only fastened on to the idea which
accompanies it, and is derived from another source.
On account of this intimate relation of dream-anxiety to neurotic anxiety, the discussion of the former obliges me to refer to the latter. In a little
essay on Anxiety Neurosis, [14] written in 1895, I maintain that neurotic anxiety has its origin in the sexual life, and corresponds to a libido which
has been deflected from its object and has found no employment. The accuracy of this formula has since then been demonstrated with everincreasing certainty. From it we may deduce the doctrine that anxiety-dreams are dreams of sexual content, and that the libido appertaining to this
content has been transformed into anxiety. Later on I shall have an opportunity of confirming this assertion by the analysis of several dreams of
neurotics. In my further attempts to arrive at a theory of dreams I shall again have occasion to revert to the conditions of anxiety-dreams and their
compatibility with the theory of wish-fulfilment.

Having realized, as a result of analysing the dream of Irma's injection, that the dream was the fulfilment of a wish, we were immediately
interested to ascertain whether we had thereby discovered a general characteristic of dreams, and for the time being we put aside every other
scientific problem which may have suggested itself in the course of the interpretation. Now that we have reached the goal on this one path, we
may turn back and select a new point of departure for exploring dream-problems, even though we may for a time lose sight of the theme of wishfulfilment, which has still to be further considered.
Now that we are able, by applying our process of interpretation, to detect a latent dream-content whose significance far surpasses that of the
manifest dream-content, we are naturally impelled to return to the individual dream-problems, in order to see whether the riddles and
contradictions which seemed to elude us when we had only the manifest content to work upon may not now be satisfactorily solved.
The opinions of previous writers on the relation of dreams to waking life, and the origin of the material of dreams, have not been given here. We
may recall however three peculiarities of the memory in dreams, which have been often noted, but never explained:
1. That the dream clearly prefers the impressions of the last few days (Robert, Strumpell, Hildebrandt; also Weed-Hallam);
2. That it makes a selection in accordance with principles other than those governing our waking memory, in that it recalls not essential and
important, but subordinate and disregarded things;
3. That it has at its disposal the earliest impressions of our childhood, and brings to light details from this period of life, which, again, seem trivial
to us, and which in waking life were believed to have been long since forgotten.[1]
These peculiarities in the dream's choice of material have, of course, been observed by previous writers in the manifest dream- content.
A. Recent and Indifferent Impressions in the Dream
If I now consult my own experience with regard to the origin of the elements appearing in the dream-content, I must in the first place express the
opinion that in every dream we may find some reference to the experiences of the preceding day. Whatever dream I turn to, whether my own or
someone else's, this experience is always confirmed. Knowing this, I may perhaps begin the work of interpretation by looking for the experience
of the preceding day which has stimulated the dream; in many cases this is indeed the quickest way. With the two dreams which I subjected to a
close analysis in the last chapter (the dreams of Irma's injection, and of the uncle with the yellow beard) the reference to the preceding day is so 
evident that it needs no further elucidation. But in order to show how constantly this reference may be demonstrated, I shall examine a portion of
my own dream- chronicle, I shall relate only so much of the dreams as is necessary for the detection of the dream-source in question.
1. I pay a call at a house to which I gain admittance only with difficulty, etc., and meanwhile I am keeping a woman waiting for me.
Source: A conversation during the evening with a female relative to the effect that she would have to wait for a remittance for which she had
asked, until... etc.
2. I have written a monograph on a species (uncertain) of plant.
Source: In the morning I had seen in a bookseller's window a monograph on the genus Cyclamen.
3. I see two women in the street, mother and daughter, the latter being a patient.
Source: A female patient who is under treatment had told me in the evening what difficulties her mother puts in the way of her continuing the
treatment.
4. At S and R's bookshop I subscribe to a periodical which costs 20 florins annually.
Source: During the day my wife has reminded me that I still owe her 20 florins of her weekly allowance.
5. I receive a communication from the Social Democratic Committee, in which I am addressed as a member.
Source: I have received simultaneous communications from the Liberal Committee on Elections and from the president of the Humanitarian
Society, of which latter I am actually a member.
6. A man on a steep rock rising from the sea, in the manner of Bocklin.
Source: Dreyfus on Devil's Island; also news from my relatives in England, etc.
The question might be raised, whether a dream invariably refers to the events of the preceding day only, or whether the reference may be
extended to include impressions from a longer period of time in the immediate past. This question is probably not of the first importance, but I am
inclined to decide in favour of the exclusive priority of the day before the dream (the dream-day). Whenever I thought I had found a case where
an impression two or three days old was the source of the dream, I was able to convince myself after careful investigation that this impression had
been remembered the day before; that is, that a demonstrable reproduction on the day before had been interpolated between the day of the event
and the time of the dream; and further, I was able to point to the recent occasion which might have given rise to the recollection of the older
impression. On the other hand, I was unable to convince myself that a regular interval of biological significance (H. Swoboda gives the first
interval of this kind as eighteen hours) elapses between the dream-exciting daytime impression and its recurrence in the dream.
I believe, therefore, that for every dream a dream-stimulus may be found among these experiences "on which one has not yet slept."
Havelock Ellis, who has likewise given attention to this problem, states that he has not been able to find any such periodicity of reproduction in
his dreams, although he has looked for it. He relates a dream in which he found himself in Spain; he wanted to travel to a place called Daraus,
Varaus, or Zaraus. On awaking he was unable to recall any such place-names, and thought no more of the matter. A few months later he actually
found the name Zaraus; it was that of a railway-station between San Sebastian and Bilbao, through which he had passed in the train eight months
(250 days) before the date of the dream.
Thus the impressions of the immediate past (with the exception of the day before the night of the dream) stand in the same relation to the dreamcontent as those of periods indefinitely remote. The dream may select its material from any period of life, provided only that a chain of thought
leads back from the experiences of the day of the dream (the recent impressions) of that earlier period.
But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall arrive at some conjectures on this point if we subject one of the dreams already
mentioned to a more precise analysis. I select the
Dream of the Botanical Monograph
I have written a monograph on a certain plant. The book lies before me; I am just turning over a folded coloured plate. A dried specimen of the
plant, as though from a herbarium, is bound up with every copy. 
Analysis
In the morning I saw in a bookseller's window a volume entitled The Genus Cyclamen, apparently a monograph on this plant.
The cyclamen is my wife's favorite flower. I reproach myself for remembering so seldom to bring her flowers, as she would like me to do. In
connection with the theme of giving her flowers, I am reminded of a story which I recently told some friends of mine in proof of my assertion that
we often forget in obedience to a purpose of the unconscious, and that forgetfulness always enables us to form a deduction about the secret
disposition of the forgetful person. A young woman who has been accustomed to receive a bouquet of flowers from her husband on her birthday
misses this token of affection on one of her birthdays, and bursts into tears. The husband comes in, and cannot understand why she is crying until
she tells him: "Today is my birthday." He claps his hand to his forehead, and exclaims: "Oh, forgive me, I had completely forgotten it!" and
proposes to go out immediately in order to get her flowers. But she refuses to be consoled, for she sees in her husband's forgetfulness a proof that
she no longer plays the same part in his thoughts as she formerly did. This Frau L met my wife two days ago, told her that she was feeling well,
and asked after me. Some years ago she was a patient of mine.
Supplementary facts: I did once actually write something like a monograph on a plant, namely, an essay on the coca plant, which attracted the
attention of K. Koller to the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I had hinted that the alkaloid might be employed as an anaesthetic, but I was not
thorough enough to pursue the matter farther. It occurs to me, too, that on the morning of the day following the dream (for the interpretation of
which I did not find time until the evening) I had thought of cocaine in a kind of day-dream. If I were ever afflicted with glaucoma, I would go to
Berlin, and there undergo an operation, incognito, in the house of my Berlin friend, at the hands of a surgeon whom he would recommend. The
surgeon, who would not know the name of his patient, would boast, as usual, how easy these operations had become since the introduction of
cocaine; and I should not betray the fact that I myself had a share in this discovery. With this phantasy were connected thoughts of how awkward
it really is for a physician to claim the professional services of a colleague. I should be able to pay the Berlin eye specialist, who did not know me,
like anyone else. Only after recalling this day-dream do I realize that there is concealed behind it the memory of a definite event. Shortly after
Koller's discovery, my father contracted glaucoma; he was operated on by my friend Dr. Koenigstein, the eye specialist. Dr. Koller was in charge
of the cocaine anaesthetization, and he made the remark that on this occasion all the three persons who had been responsible for the introduction
of cocaine had been brought together.
My thoughts now pass on to the time when I was last reminded of the history of cocaine. This was a few days earlier, when I received a
Festschrift, a publication in which grateful pupils had commemorated the jubilee of their teacher and laboratory director. Among the titles to fame
of persons connected with the laboratory I found a note to the effect that the discovery of the anaesthetic properties of cocaine had been due to K.
Koller. Now I suddenly become aware that the dream is connected with an experience of the previous evening. I had just accompanied Dr.
Koenigstein to his home, and had entered into a discussion of a subject which excites me greatly whenever it is mentioned. While I was talking
with him in the entrance-hall Professor Gartner and his young wife came up. I could not refrain from congratulating them both upon their
blooming appearance. Now Professor Gartner is one of the authors of the Festschrift of which I have just spoken, and he may well have reminded
me of it. And Frau L, of whose birthday disappointment I spoke a little way back, had been mentioned, though of course in another connection, in
my conversation with Dr. Koenigstein.
I shall now try to elucidate the other determinants of the dream- content. A dried specimen of the plant accompanies the monograph, as though it
were a herbarium. And herbarium reminds me of the Gymnasium. The director of our Gymnasium once called the pupils of the upper classes
together, in order that they might examine and clean the Gymnasium herbarium. Small insects had been found- book-worms. The director seemed
to have little confidence in my ability to assist, for he entrusted me with only a few of the pages. I know to this day that there were crucifers on
them. My interest in botany was never very great. At my preliminary examination in botany I was required to identify a crucifer, and failed to
recognize it; had not my theoretical knowledge come to my aid, I should have fared badly indeed. Crucifers suggest composites. The artichoke is
really a composite, and in actual fact one which I might call my favourite flower. My wife, more thoughtful than I, often brings this favourite
flower of mine home from the market.
I see the monograph which I have written lying before me. Here again there is an association. My friend wrote to me yesterday from Berlin: "I am
thinking a great deal about your dream-book. I see it lying before me, completed, and I turn the pages." How I envied him this power of vision! If
only I could see it lying before me, already completed!
The folded coloured plate. When I was a medical student I suffered a sort of craze for studying monographs exclusively. In spite of my limited
means, I subscribed to a number of the medical periodicals, whose coloured plates afforded me much delight. I was rather proud of this
inclination to thoroughness. When I subsequently began to publish books myself, I had to draw the plates for my own treatises, and I remember
one of them turned out so badly that a well-meaning colleague ridiculed me for it. With this is associated, I do not exactly know how, a very early
memory of my childhood. My father, by the way of a jest, once gave my elder sister and myself a book containing coloured plates (the book was
a narrative of a journey through Persia) in order that we might destroy it. From an educational point of view this was hardly to be commended. I
was at the time five years old, and my sister less than three, and the picture of us two children blissfully tearing the book to pieces (I should add,
like an artichoke, leaf by leaf), is almost the only one from this period of my life which has remained vivid in my memory. When I afterwards
became a student, I developed a conspicuous fondness for collecting and possessing books (an analogy to the inclination for studying from 
monographs, a hobby alluded to in my dream-thoughts, in connection with cyclamen and artichoke). I became a book-worm (cf. herbarium). Ever
since I have been engaged in introspection I have always traced this earliest passion of my life to this impression of my childhood: or rather, I
have recognized in this childish scene a screen or concealing memory for my subsequent bibliophilia.[2] And of course I learned at an early age
that our passions often become our misfortunes. When I was seventeen, I ran up a very considerable account at the bookseller's, with no means
with which to settle it, and my father would hardly accept it as an excuse that my passion was at least a respectable one. But the mention of this
experience of my youth brings me back to my conversation with my friend Dr. Koenigstein on the evening preceding the dream; for one of the
themes of this conversation was the same old reproach- that I am much too absorbed in my hobbies.
For reasons which are not relevant here I shall not continue the interpretation of this dream, but will merely indicate the path which leads to it. In
the course of the interpretation I was reminded of my conversation with Dr. Koenigstein, and, indeed, of more than one portion of it. When I
consider the subjects touched upon in this conversation, the meaning of the dream immediately becomes clear to me. All the trains of thought
which have been started- my own inclinations, and those of my wife, the cocaine, the awkwardness of securing medical treatment from one's own
colleagues, my preference for monographical studies, and my neglect of certain subjects, such as botany- all these are continued in and lead up to
one branch or another of this widely- ramified conversation. The dream once more assumes the character of a justification, of a plea for my rights
(like the dream of Irma's injection, the first to be analysed); it even continues the theme which that dream introduced, and discusses it in
association with the new subject-matter which has been added in the interval between the two dreams. Even the dream's apparently indifferent
form of expression at once acquires a meaning. Now it means: "I am indeed the man who has written that valuable and successful treatise (on
cocaine)," just as previously I declared in self-justification: "I am after all a thorough and industrious student"; and in both instances I find the
meaning: "I can allow myself this." But I may dispense with the further interpretation of the dream, because my only purpose in recording it was
to examine the relation of the dream-content to the experience of the previous day which arouses it. As long as I know only the manifest content
of this dream, only one relation to any impression of the day is obvious; but after I have completed the interpretation, a second source of the
dream becomes apparent in another experience of the same day. The first of these impressions to which the dream refers is an indifferent one, a
subordinate circumstance. I see a book in a shop window whose title holds me for a moment, but whose contents would hardly interest me. The
second experience was of great psychic value; I talked earnestly with my friend, the eye specialist, for about an hour; I made allusions in this
conversation which must have ruffled the feelings of both of us, and which in me awakened memories in connection with which I was aware of a
great variety of inner stimuli. Further, this conversation was broken off unfinished, because some acquaintances joined us. What, now, is the
relation of these two impressions of the day to one another, and to the dream which followed during the night?
In the manifest dream-content I find merely an allusion to the indifferent impression, and I am thus able to reaffirm that the dream prefers to take
up into its content experiences of a non- essential character. In the dream-interpretation, on the contrary, everything converges upon the important
and justifiably disturbing event. If I judge the sense of the dream in the only correct way, according to the latent content which is brought to light
in the analysis, I find that I have unwittingly lighted upon a new and important discovery. I see that the puzzling theory that the dream deals only
with the worthless odds and ends of the day's experiences has no justification; I am also compelled to contradict the assertion that the psychic life
of the waking state is not continued in the dream, and that hence, the dream wastes our psychic energy on trivial material. The very opposite is
true; what has claimed our attention during the day dominates our dream-thoughts also, and we take pains to dream only in connection with such
matters as have given us food for thought during the day.
Perhaps the most immediate explanation of the fact that I dream of the indifferent impression of the day, while the impression which has with
good reason excited me causes me to dream, is that here again we are dealing with the phenomenon of dream- distortion, which we have referred
to as a psychic force playing the part of a censorship. The recollection of the monograph on the genus cyclamen is utilized as though it were an
allusion to the conversation with my friend, just as the mention of my patient's friend in the dream of the deferred supper is represented by the
allusion smoked salmon. The only question is: by what intermediate links can the impression of the monograph come to assume the relation of
allusion to the conversation with the eye specialist, since such a relation is not at first perceptible? In the example of the deferred supper, the
relation is evident at the outset; smoked salmon, as the favourite dish of the patient's friend, belongs to the circle of ideas which the friend's
personality would naturally evoke in the mind of the dreamer. In our new example we are dealing with two entirely separate impressions, which
at first glance seem to have nothing in common, except indeed that they occur on the same day. The monograph attracts my attention in the
morning: in the evening I take part in the conversation. The answer furnished by the analysis is as follows: Such relations between the two
impressions as do not exist from the first are established subsequently between the idea-content of the one impression and the idea-content of the
other. I have already picked out the intermediate links emphasized in the course of writing the analysis. Only under some outside influence,
perhaps the recollection of the flowers missed by Frau L, would the idea of the monograph on the cyclamen have attached itself to the idea that
the cyclamen is my wife's favourite flower. I do not believe that these inconspicuous thoughts would have sufficed to evoke a dream.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this,
as we read in Hamlet. But behold! in the analysis I am reminded that the name of the man who interrupted our conversation was Gartner
(gardener), and that I thought his wife looked blooming; indeed, now I even remember that one of my female patients, who bears the pretty name
of Flora, was for a time the main subject of our conversation. It must have happened that by means of these intermediate links from the sphere of
botanical ideas the association was effected between the two events of the day, the indifferent one and the stimulating one. Other relations were 
then established, that of cocaine for example, which can with perfect appropriateness form a link between the person of Dr. Koenigstein and the
botanical monograph which I have written, and thus secure the fusion of the two circles of ideas, so that now a portion of the first experience may
be used as an allusion to the second.
I am prepared to find this explanation attacked as either arbitrary or artificial. What would have happened if Professor Gartner and his blooming
wife had not appeared, and if the patient who was under discussion had been called, not Flora, but Anna? And yet the answer is not hard to find.
If these thought- relations had not been available, others would probably have been selected. It is easy to establish relations of this sort, as the
jocular questions and conundrums with which we amuse ourselves suffice to show. The range of wit is unlimited. To go a step farther: if no
sufficiently fertile associations between the two impressions of the day could have been established, the dream would simply have followed a
different course; another of the indifferent impressions of the day, such as come to us in multitudes and are forgotten, would have taken the place
of the monograph in the dream, would have formed an association with the content of the conversation, and would have represented this in the
dream. Since it was the impression of the monograph and no other that was fated to perform this function, this impression was probably that most
suitable for the purpose. One need not, like Lessing's Hanschen Schlau, be astonished that "only the rich people of the world possess the most
money."
Still the psychological process by which, according to our exposition, the indifferent experience substitutes itself for the psychologically
important one seems to us odd and open to question. In a later chapter we shall undertake the task of making the peculiarities of this seemingly
incorrect operation more intelligible. Here we are concerned only with the result of this process, which we were compelled to accept by
constantly recurring experiences in the analysis of dreams. In this process it is as though, in the course of the intermediate steps, a displacement
occurs- let us say, of the psychic accent- until ideas of feeble potential, by taking over the charge from ideas which have a stronger initial
potential, reach a degree of intensity which enables them to force their way into consciousness. Such displacements do not in the least surprise us
when it is a question of the transference of affective magnitudes or of motor activities. That the lonely spinster transfers her affection to animals,
that the bachelor becomes a passionate collector, that the soldier defends a scrap of coloured cloth- his flag- with his life-blood, that in a loveaffair a clasp of the hands a moment longer than usual evokes a sensation of bliss, or that in Othello a lost handkerchief causes an outburst of rageall these are examples of psychic displacements which to us seem incontestable. But if, by the same means, and in accordance with the same
fundamental principles, a decision is made as to what is to reach our consciousness and what is to be withheld from it- that is to say, what we are
to think- this gives us the impression of morbidity, and if it occurs in waking life we call it an error of thought. We may here anticipate the result
of a discussion which will be undertaken later, namely, that the psychic process which we have recognized in dream-displacement proves to be
not a morbidly deranged process, but one merely differing from the normal, one of a more primary nature.
Thus we interpret the fact that the dream-content takes up remnants of trivial experiences as a manifestation of dream- distortion (by
displacement), and we thereupon remember that we have recognized this dream-distortion as the work of a censorship operating between the two
psychic instances. We may therefore expect that dream-analysis will constantly show us the real and psychically significant source of the dream
in the events of the day, the memory of which has transferred its accentuation to some indifferent memory. This conception is in complete
opposition to Robert's theory, which consequently has no further value for us. The fact which Robert was trying to explain simply does not exist;
its assumption is based on a misunderstanding, on a failure to substitute the real meaning of the dream for its apparent meaning. A further
objection to Robert's doctrine is as follows: If the task of the dream were really to rid our memory, by means of a special psychic activity, of the
slag of the day's recollections, our sleep would perforce be more troubled, engaged in more strenuous work, than we can suppose it to be, judging
by our waking thoughts. For the number of the indifferent impressions of the day against which we should have to protect our memory is
obviously immeasurably large; the whole night would not be long enough to dispose of them all. It is far more probable that the forgetting of the
indifferent impressions takes place without any active interference on the part of our psychic powers.
Still, something cautions us against taking leave of Robert's theory without further consideration. We have left unexplained the fact that one of the
indifferent impressions of the day- indeed, even of the previous day- constantly makes a contribution to the dream-content. The relations between
this impression and the real source of the dream in the unconscious do not always exist from the outset; as we have seen, they are established
subsequently, while the dream is actually at work, as though to serve the purpose of the intended displacement. Something, therefore, must
necessitate the opening up of connections in the direction of the recent but indifferent impression; this impression must possess some quality that
gives it a special fitness. Otherwise it would be just as easy for the dream- thoughts to shift their accentuation to some inessential component of
their own sphere of ideas.
Experiences such as the following show us the way to an explanation: If the day has brought us two or more experiences which are worthy to
evoke a dream, the dream will blend the allusion of both into a single whole: it obeys a compulsion to make them into a single whole. For
example: One summer afternoon I entered a railway carriage in which I found two acquaintances of mine who were unknown to one another. One
of them was an influential colleague, the other a member of a distinguished family which I had been attending in my professional capacity. I
introduced the two gentlemen to each other; but during the long journey they conversed with each other through me, so that I had to discuss this
or that topic now with one, now with the other. I asked my colleague to recommend a mutual acquaintance who had just begun to practise as a
physician. He replied that he was convinced of the young man's ability, but that his undistinguished appearance would make it difficult for him to
obtain patients in the upper ranks of society. To this I rejoined: "That is precisely why he needs recommendation." A little later, turning to my
other fellow-traveller, I inquired after the health of his aunt- the mother of one of my patients- who was at this time prostrated by a serious illness.
On the night following this journey I dreamt that the young friend whom I had asked one of my companions to recommend was in a fashionable 
drawing-room, and with all the bearing of a man of the world was making- before a distinguished company, in which I recognized all the rich and
aristocratic persons of my acquaintance- a funeral oration over the old lady (who in my dream had already died) who was the aunt of my second
fellow- traveller. (I confess frankly that I had not been on good terms with this lady.) Thus my dream had once more found the connection
between the two impressions of the day, and by means of the two had constructed a unified situation.
In view of many similar experiences, I am persuaded to advance the proposition that a dream works under a kind of compulsion which forces it to
combine into a unified whole all the sources of dream-stimulation which are offered to it.[3] In a subsequent chapter (on the function of dreams)
we shall consider this impulse of combination as part of the process of condensation, another primary psychic process.
I shall now consider the question whether the dream-exciting source to which our analysis leads us must always be a recent (and significant)
event, or whether a subjective experience- that is to say, the recollection of a psychologically significant event, a train of thought- may assume the
role of a dream- stimulus. The very definite answer, derived from numerous analyses, is as follows: The stimulus of the dream may be a
subjective transaction, which has been made recent, as it were, by the mental activity of the day.
And this is perhaps the best time to summarize in schematic form the different conditions under which the dream-sources are operative.
The source of a dream may be:
(a) A recent and psychologically significant event which is directly represented in the dream.[4]
(b) Several recent and significant events, which are combined by the dream in a single whole.[5]
(c) One or more recent and significant events, which are represented in the dream-content by allusion to a contemporary but indifferent event.[6]
(d) A subjectively significant experience (recollection, train of thought), which is constantly represented in the dream by allusion to a recent but
indifferent impression.[7]
As may be seen, in dream-interpretation the condition is always fulfilled that one component of the dream-content repeats a recent impression of
the day of the dream. The component which is destined to be represented in the dream may either belong to the same circle of ideas as the dreamstimulus itself (as an essential or even an inessential element of the same); or it may originate in the neighbourhood of an indifferent impression,
which has been brought by more or less abundant associations into relation with the sphere of the dream-stimulus. The apparent multiplicity of
these conditions results merely from the alternative, that a displacement has or has not occurred, and it may here be noted that this alternative
enables us to explain the contrasts of the dream quite as readily as the medical theory of the dream explains the series of states from the partial to
the complete waking of the brain cells.
In considering this series of sources we note further that the psychologically significant but not recent element (a train of thought, a recollection)
may be replaced for the purposes of dream-formation by a recent but psychologically indifferent element, provided the two following conditions
are fulfilled: (1) the dream-content preserves a connection with things recently experienced; (2) the dream-stimulus is still a psychologically
significant event. In one single case (a) both these conditions are fulfilled by the same impression. If we now consider that these same indifferent
impressions, which are utilized for the dream as long as they are recent, lose this qualification as soon as they are a day (or at most several days)
older, we are obliged to assume that the very freshness of an impression gives it a certain psychological value for dream-formation, somewhat
equivalent to the value of emotionally accentuated memories or trains of thought. Later on, in the light of certain Psychological considerations,
we shall be able to divine the explanation of this importance of recent impressions in dream formation.[8]
Incidentally our attention is here called to the fact that at night, and unnoticed by our consciousness, important changes may occur in the material
comprised by our ideas and memories. The injunction that before making a final decision in any matter one should sleep on it for a night is
obviously fully justified. But at this point we find that we have passed from the psychology of dreaming to the psychology of sleep, a step which
there will often be occasion to take.
At this point there arises an objection which threatens to invalidate the conclusions at which we have just arrived. If indifferent impressions can
find their way into the dream only so long as they are of recent origin, how does it happen that in the dream-content we find elements also from
earlier periods of our lives, which, at the time when they were still recent, possessed, as Strumpell puts it, no psychic value, and which, therefore,
ought to have been forgotten long ago; elements, that is, which are neither fresh nor psychologically significant?
This objection can be disposed of completely if we have recourse to the results of the psychoanalysis of neurotics. The solution is as follows: The
process of shifting and rearrangement which replaces material of psychic significance by material which is indifferent (whether one is dreaming
or thinking) has already taken place in these earlier periods of life, and has since become fixed in the memory. Those elements which were
originally indifferent are in fact no longer so, since they have acquired the value of psychologically significant material. That which has actually 
remained indifferent can never be reproduced in the dream.
From the foregoing exposition the reader may rightly conclude that I assert that there are no indifferent dream-stimuli, and therefore no guileless
dreams. This I absolutely and unconditionally believe to be the case, apart from the dreams of children, and perhaps the brief dream-reactions to
nocturnal sensations. Apart from these exceptions, whatever one dreams is either plainly recognizable as being psychically significant, or it is
distorted and can be judged correctly only after complete interpretation, when it proves, after all, to be of psychic significance. The dream never
concerns itself with trifles; we do not allow sleep to be disturbed by trivialities.[9] Dreams which are apparently guileless turn out to be the
reverse of innocent, if one takes the trouble to interpret them; if I may be permitted the expression, they ail show "the mark of the beast." Since
this is another point on which I may expect contradiction, and since I am glad of an opportunity to show dream-distortion at work, I shall here
subject to analysis a number of guileless dreams from my collection.
I.
An intelligent and refined young woman, who in real life is distinctly reserved, one of those people of whom one says that "still waters run deep,"
relates the following dream: "I dreamt that I arrived at the market too late, and could get nothing from either the butcher or the greengrocer
woman." Surely a guileless dream, but as it has not the appearance of a real dream I induce her to relate it in detail. Her report then runs as
follows: She goes to the market with her cook, who carries the basket. The butcher tells her, after she has asked him for something: "That is no
longer to be obtained," and waits to give her something else, with the remark: "That is good, too." She refuses, and goes to the greengrocer
woman. The latter tries to sell her a peculiar vegetable, which is bound up in bundles, and is black in colour. She says: "I don't know that, I won't
take it."
The connection of the dream with the preceding day is simple enough. She had really gone to the market too late, and had been unable to buy
anything. The meatshop was already closed, comes into one's mind as a description of the experience. But wait, is not that a very vulgar phrase
which- or rather, the opposite of which- denotes a certain neglect with regard to man's clothing? The dreamer has not used these words; she has
perhaps avoided them: but let us look for the interpretation of the details contained in the dream.
When in a dream something has the character of a spoken utterance- that is, when it is said or heard, not merely thought, and the distinction can
usually be made with certainty- then it originates in the utterances of waking life, which have, of course, been treated as raw material,
dismembered, and slightly altered, and above all removed from their context.[10] In the work of interpretation we may take such utterances as our
starting- point. Where, then, does the butcher's statement, That is no longer to be obtained, come from? From myself; I had explained to her some
days previously "that the oldest experiences of childhood are no longer to be obtained as such, but will be replaced in the analysis by
transferences and dreams." Thus, I am the butcher, and she refuses to accept these transferences to the present of old ways of thinking and feeling.
Where does her dream utterance, I don't know that, I won't take it, come from? For the purposes of the analysis this has to be dissected. I don't
know that she herself had said to her cook, with whom she had a dispute on the previous day, but she had then added: Behave yourself decently.
Here a displacement is palpable; of the two sentences which she spoke to her cook, she included the insignificant one in her dream; but the
suppressed sentence, Behave yourself decently! alone fits in with the rest of the dream-content. One might use the words to a man who was
making indecent overtures, and had neglected "to close his meat-shop." That we have really hit upon the trail of the interpretation is proved by its
agreement with the allusions made by the incident with the greengrocer woman. A vegetable which is sold tied up in bundles (a longish
vegetable, as she subsequently adds), and is also black: what can this be but a dream-combination of asparagus and black radish? I need not
interpret asparagus to the initiated; and the other vegetable, too (think of the exclamation: "Blacky, save yourself!"), seems to me to point to the
sexual theme at which we guessed in the beginning, when we wanted to replace the story of the dream by "the meat-shop is closed." We are not
here concerned with the full meaning of the dream; so much is certain, that it is full of meaning and by no means guileless.[11]
II.
Another guileless dream of the same patient, which in some respects is a pendant to the above. Her husband asks her: "Oughtn't we to have the
piano tuned?" She replies: "It's not worth while, the hammers would have to be rebuffed as well." Again we have the reproduction of an actual
event of the preceding day. Her husband had asked her such a question, and she had answered it in such words. But what is the meaning of her
dreaming it? She says of the piano that it is a disgusting old box which has a bad tone; it belonged to her husband before they were married,[12]
etc., but the key to the true solution lies in the phrase: It isn't worth while. This has its origin in a call paid yesterday to a woman friend. She was
asked to take off her coat, but declined, saying: "Thanks, it isn't worth while, I must go in a moment." At this point I recall that yesterday, during
the analysis, she suddenly took hold of her coat, of which a button had come undone. It was as though she meant to say: "Please don't look in, it
isn't worth while." Thus box becomes chest, and the interpretation of the dream leads to the years when she was growing out of her childhood,
when she began to be dissatisfied with her figure. It leads us back, indeed, to earlier periods, if we take into consideration the disgusting and the
bad tone, and remember how often in allusions and in dreams the two small hemispheres of the female body take the place- as a substitute and an
antithesis- of the large ones.
III. 
I will interrupt the analysis of this dreamer in order to insert a short, innocent dream which was dreamed by a young man. He dreamt that he was
putting on his winter overcoat again; this was terrible. The occasion for this dream is apparently the sudden advent of cold weather. On more
careful examination we note that the two brief fragments of the dream do not fit together very well, for what could be terrible about wearing a
thick or heavy coat in cold weather? Unfortunately for the innocency of this dream, the first association, under analysis, yields the recollection
that yesterday a lady had confidentially confessed to him that her last child owed its existence to the splitting of a condom. He now reconstructs
his thoughts in accordance with this suggestion: A thin condom is dangerous, a thick one is bad. The condom is a "pullover" (Ueberzieher =
literally pullover), for it is pulled over something: and Uebersieher is the German term for a light overcoat. An experience like that related by the
lady would indeed be terrible for an unmarried man.
We will now return to our other innocent dreamer.
IV.
She puts a candle into a candlestick; but the candle is broken, so that it does not stand up. The girls at school say she is clumsy; but she replies
that it is not her fault.
Here, too, there is an actual occasion for the dream; the day before she had actually put a candle into a candlestick; but this one was not broken.
An obvious symbolism has here been employed. The candle is an object which excites the female genitals; its being broken, so that it does not
stand upright, signifies impotence on the man's part (it is not her fault). But does this young woman, carefully brought up, and a stranger to all
obscenity, know of such an application of the candle? By chance she is able to tell how she came by this information. While paddling a canoe on
the Rhine, a boat passed her which contained some students, who were singing rapturously, or rather yelling: "When the Queen of Sweden,
behind closed shutters, with the candles of Apollo..."
She does not hear or else understand the last word. Her husband was asked to give her the required explanation. These verses are then replaced in
the dream-content by the innocent recollection of a task which she once performed clumsily at her boarding- school, because of the closed
shutters. The connection between the theme of masturbation and that of impotence is clear enough. Apollo in the latent dream-content connects
this dream with an earlier one in which the virgin Pallas figured. All this is obviously not innocent.
V.
Lest it may seem too easy a matter to draw conclusions from dreams concerning the dreamer's real circumstances, I add another dream originatingwith the same person, which once more appears innocent. "I dreamt of doing something," she relates, "which I actually did during the day, that is
to say, I filled a little trunk so full of books that I had difficulty in closing it. My dream was just like the actual occurrence." Here the dreamer
herself emphasizes the correspondence between the dream and the reality. All such criticisms of the dream, and comments on the dream, although
they have found a place in the waking thoughts, properly belong to the latent dream-content, as further examples will confirm. We are told, then,
that what the dream relates has actually occurred during the day. It would take us too far afield to show how we arrive at the idea of making use
of the English language to help us in the interpretation of this dream. Suffice it to say that it is again a question of a little box (cf. chap. IV, the
dream of the dead child in the box) which has been filled so full that nothing can go into it.
In all these "innocent" dreams the sexual factor as the motive of the censorship is very prominent. But this is a subject of primary significance,
which we must consider later.
B. Infantile Experiences as the Source of Dreams
As the third of the peculiarities of the dream-content, we have adduced the fact, in agreement with all other writers on the subject (excepting
Robert), that impressions from our childhood may appear in dreams, which do not seem to be at the disposal of the waking memory. It is, of
course, difficult to decide how seldom or how frequently this occurs, because after waking the origin of the respective elements of the dream is
not recognized. The proof that we are dealing with impressions of our childhood must thus be adduced objectively, and only in rare instances do
the conditions favour such proof. The story is told by A. Maury, as being particularly conclusive, of a man who decides to visit his birthplace
after an absence of twenty years. On the night before his departure he dreams that he is in a totally unfamiliar locality, and that he there meets a
strange man with whom he holds a conversation. Subsequently, upon his return home, he is able to convince himself that this strange locality
really exists in the vicinity of his home, and the strange man in the dream turns out to be a friend of his dead father's, who is living in the town.
This is, of course, a conclusive proof that in his childhood he had seen both the man and the locality. The dream, moreover, is to be interpreted as
a dream of impatience, like the dream of the girl who carries in her pocket the ticket for a concert, the dream of the child whose father had
promised him an excursion to the Hameau (ch. III), and so forth. The motives which reproduce just these impressions of childhood for the
dreamer cannot, of course, be discovered without analysis.
One of my colleagues, who attended my lectures, and who boasted that his dreams were very rarely subject to distortion, told me that he had
sometime previously seen, in a dream, his former tutor in bed with his nurse, who had remained in the household until his eleventh year. The 
actual location of this scene was realized even in the dream. As he was greatly interested, he related the dream to his elder brother, who
laughingly confirmed its reality. The brother said that he remembered the affair very distinctly, for he was six years old at the time. The lovers
were in the habit of making him, the elder boy, drunk with beer whenever circumstances were favourable to their nocturnal intercourse. The
younger child, our dreamer, at that time three years of age, slept in the same room as the nurse, but was not regarded as an obstacle.
In yet another case it may be definitely established, without the aid of dream-interpretation, that the dream contains elements from childhoodnamely, if the dream is a so-called perennial dream, one which, being first dreamt in childhood, recurs again and again in adult years. I may add a
few examples of this sort to those already known, although I have no personal knowledge of perennial dreams. A physician, in his thirties, tells
me that a yellow lion, concerning which he is able to give the precisest information, has often appeared in his dream-life, from his earliest
childhood up to the present day. This lion, known to him from his dreams, was one day discovered in natura, as a longforgotten china animal. The
young man then learned from his mother that the lion had been his favourite toy in early childhood, a fact which he himself could no longer
remember.
If we now turn from the manifest dream-content to the dreamthoughts which are revealed only on analysis, the experiences of childhood may be
found to recur even in dreams whose content would not have led us to suspect anything of the sort. I owe a particularly delightful and instructive
example of such a dream
to my esteemed colleague of the "yellow lion." After reading Nansen's account of his polar expedition, he dreamt that he was giving the intrepid
explorer electrical treatment on an ice-floe for the sciatica of which the latter complained! During the analysis of this dream he remembered an
incident of his childhood, without which the dream would be wholly unintelligible. When he was three or four years of age he was one day
listening attentively to the conversation of his elders; they were talking of exploration, and he presently asked his father whether exploration was
a bad illness. He had apparently confounded Reisen (journey, trips) with Reissen (gripes, tearing pains), and the derision of his brothers and
sisters prevented his ever forgetting the humiliating experience.
We have a precisely similar case when, in the analysis of the dream of the monograph on the genus cyclamen, I stumble upon a memory, retained
from childhood, to the effect that when I was five years old my father allowed me to destroy a book embellished with coloured plates. It will
perhaps be doubted whether this recollection really entered into the composition of the dream content, and it may be suggested that the
connection was established subsequently by the analysis. But the abundance and intricacy of the associative connections vouch for the truth of my
explanation: cyclamen- favourite flower- favourite dish- artichoke; to pick to pieces like an artichoke, leaf by leaf (a phrase which at that time one
heard daily, a propos of the dividing up of the Chinese empire); herbarium- bookworm, whose favourite food is books. I can further assure the
reader that the ultimate meaning of the dream, which I have not given here, is most intimately connected with the content of the scene of childish
destruction.
In another series of dreams we learn from analysis that the very wish which has given rise to the dream, and whose fulfilment the dream proves to
be, has itself originated in childhood, so that one is astonished to find that the child with all his impulses survives in the dream.
I shall now continue the interpretation of a dream which has already proved instructive: I refer to the dream in which my friend R is my uncle. We
have carried its interpretation far enough for the wish-motive- the wish to be appointed professor- to assert itself palpably; and we have explained
the affection felt for my friend R in the dream as the outcome of opposition to, and defiance of, the two colleagues who appear in the
dreamthoughts. Thee dream was my own; I may, therefore, continue the analysis by stating that I did not feel quite satisfied with the solution
arrived at. I knew that my opinion of these colleagues. who were so badly treated in my dream-thoughts, would have been expressed in very
different language in my waking life; the intensity of the wish that I might not share their fate as regards the appointment seemed to me too slight
fully to account for the discrepancy between my dream- opinion and my waking opinion. If the desire to be addressed by another title were really
so intense, it would be proof of a morbid ambition, which I do not think I cherish, and which I believe I was far from entertaining. I do not know
how others who think they know me would judge me; perhaps I really was ambitious; but if I was, my ambition has long since been transferred to
objects other than the rank and title of Professor extraordinarius.
Whence, then, the ambition which the dream has ascribed to me? Here I am reminded of a story which I heard often in my childhood, that at my
birth an old peasant woman had prophesied to my happy mother (whose first-born I was) that she had brought a great man into the world. Such
prophecies must be made very
frequently; there are so many happy and expectant mothers, and so many old peasant women, and other old women who, since their mundane
powers have deserted them, turn their eyes toward the future; and the prophetess is not likely to suffer for her prophecies. Is it possible that my
thirst for greatness has originated from this source? But here I recollect an impression from the later years of my childhood, which might serve
even better as an explanation. One evening, at a restaurant on the Prater, where my parents were accustomed to take me when I was eleven or
twelve years of age, we noticed a man who was going from table to table and, for a small sum, improvising verses upon any subject that was
given him. I was sent to bring the poet to our table, and he showed his gratitude. Before asking for a subject he threw off a few rhymes about
myself, and told us that if he could trust his inspiration I should probably one day become a minister. I can still distinctly remember the
impression produced by this second prophecy. It was in the days of the "bourgeois Ministry"; my father had recently brought home the portraits
of the bourgeois university graduates, Herbst, Giskra, Unger, Berger and others, and we illuminated the house in their honour. There were even 
Jews among them; so that every diligent Jewish schoolboy carried a ministerial portfolio in his satchel. The impression of that time must be
responsible for the fact that until shortly before I went to the university I wanted to study jurisprudence, and changed my mind only at the last
moment. A medical man has no chance of becoming a minister. And now for my dream: It is only now that I begin to see that it translates me
from the sombre present to the hopeful days of the bourgeois Ministry, and completely fulfils what was then my youthful ambition. In treating my
two estimable and learned colleagues, merely because they are Jews, so badly, one as though he were a simpleton and the other as though he were
a criminal, I am acting as though I were the Minister; I have put myself in his place. What a revenge I take upon his Excellency! He refuses to
appoint me Professor extraordinarius, and so in my dream I put myself in his place.
In another case I note the fact that although the wish that excites the dream is a contemporary wish it is nevertheless greatly reinforced by
memories of childhood. I refer to a series of dreams which are based on the longing to go to Rome. For a long time to come I shall probably have
to satisfy this longing by means of dreams, since, at the season of the year when I should be able to travel, Rome is to be avoided for reasons of
health.[13] Thus I once dreamt that I saw the Tiber and the bridge of Sant' Angelo from the window of a railway carriage; presently the train
started, and I realized that I had never entered the city at all. The view that appeared in the dream was modelled after a well-known engraving
which I had casually noticed the day before in the drawing-room of one of my patients. In another dream someone took me up a hill and showed
me Rome half shrouded in mist, and so distant that I was astonished at the distinctness of the view. The content of this dream is too rich to be
fully reported here. The motive, "to see the promised land afar," is here easily recognizable. The city which I thus saw in the mist is Lubeck; the
original of the hill is the Gleichenberg. In a third dream I am at last in Rome. To my disappointment the scenery is anything but urban: it consists
of a little stream of black water, on one side of which are black rocks, while on the other are meadows with large white flowers. I notice a certain
Herr Zucker (with whom I am superficially acquainted), and resolve to ask him to show me the way into the city. It is obvious that I am trying in
vain to see in my dream a city which I have never seen in my waking life. If I resolve the landscape into its elements, the white flowers point to
Ravenna, which is known to me, and which once, for a time, replaced Rome as the capital of Italy. In the marshes around Ravenna we had found
the most beautiful water-lilies in the midst of black pools of water; the dream makes them grow in the meadows, like the narcissi of our own
Aussee, because we found it so troublesome to cull them from the water. The black rock so close to the water vividly recalls the valley of the Tepl
at Karlsbad. Karlsbad now enables me to account for the peculiar circumstance that I ask Herr Zucker to show me the way. In the material of
which the dream is woven I am able to recognize two of those amusing Jewish anecdotes which conceal such profound and, at times, such bitter
worldly wisdom, and which we are so fond of quoting in our letters and conversation. One is the story of the constitution; it tells how a poor Jew
sneaks into the Karlsbad express without a ticket; how he is detected, and is treated more and more harshly by the conductor at each succeeding
call for tickets; and how, when a friend whom he meets at one of the stations during his miserable journey asks him where he is going, he
answers: "To Karlsbad- if my constitution holds out." Associated in memory with this is another story about a Jew who is ignorant of French, and
who has express instructions to ask in Paris for the Rue Richelieu. Paris was for many years the goal of my own longing, and I regarded the
satisfaction with which I first set foot on the pavements of Paris as a warrant that I should attain to the fulfilment of other wishes also. Moreover,
asking the way is a direct allusion to Rome, for, as we know, "all roads lead to Rome." And further, the name Zucker (sugar) again points to
Karlsbad, whither we send persons afflicted with the constitutional disease, diabetes (Zuckerkrankheit, sugardisease.) The occasion for this dream
was the proposal of my Berlin friend that we should meet in Prague at Easter. A further association with sugar and diabetes might be found in the
matters which I had to discuss with him. -
A fourth dream, occurring shortly after the last-mentioned, brings me back to Rome. I see a street corner before me, and am astonished that so
many German placards should be posted there. On the previous day, when writing to my friend, I had told him, with truly prophetic vision, that
Prague would probably not be a comfortable place for German travellers. The dream, therefore, expressed simultaneously the wish to meet him in
Rome instead of in the Bohemian capital, and the desire, which probably originated during my student days, that the German language might be
accorded more tolerance in Prague. As a matter of fact, I must have understood the Czech language in the first years of my childhood, for I was
born in a small village in Moravia, amidst a Slay population. A Czech nursery rhyme, which I heard in my seventeenth year, became, without
effort on my part, so imprinted upon my memory that I can repeat it to this day, although I have no idea of its meaning. Thus in these dreams also
there is no lack of manifold relations to the impressions of my early childhood.
During my last Italian journey, which took me past Lake Trasimenus, I at length discovered, after I had seen the Tiber, and had reluctantly turned
back some fifty miles from Rome, what a reinforcement my longing for the Eternal City had received from the impressions of my childhood. I
had just conceived a plan of travelling to Naples via Rome the following year when this sentence, which I must have read in one of our German
classics, occurred to me:[14] "It is a question which of the two paced to and fro in his room the more impatiently after he had conceived the plan
of going to Rome- Assistant Headmaster Winckelmann or the great General Hannibal." I myself had walked in Hannibal's footsteps; like him I
was destined never to see Rome, and he too had gone to Campania when all were expecting him in Rome. Hannibal, with whom I had achieved
this point of similarity, had been my favourite hero during my years at the Gymnasium; like so many boys of my age, I bestowed my sympathies
in the Punic war not on the Romans, but on the Carthaginians. Moreover, when I finally came to realize the consequences of belonging to an alien
race, and was forced by the anti-Semitic feeling among my classmates to take a definite stand, the figure of the Semitic commander assumed still
greater proportions in my imagination. Hannibal and Rome symbolized, in my youthful eyes, the struggle between the tenacity of the Jews and
the organization of the Catholic Church. The significance for our emotional life which the anti-Semitic movement has since assumed helped to fix
the thoughts and impressions of those earlier days. Thus the desire to go to Rome has in my dream- life become the mask and symbol for a
number of warmly cherished wishes, for whose realization one had to work with the tenacity and single-mindedness of the Punic general, though
their fulfilment at times seemed as remote as Hannibal's life-long wish to enter Rome. - 
And now, for the first time, I happened upon the youthful experience which even to-day still expresses its power in all these emotions and
dreams. I might have been ten or twelve years old when my father began to take me with him on his walks, and in his conversation to reveal his
views on the things of this world. Thus it was that he once told me the following incident, in order to show me that I had been born into happier
times than he: "When I was a young man, I was walking one Saturday along the street in the village where you were born; I was well-dressed,
with a new fur cap on my head. Up comes a Christian, who knocks my cap into the mud, and shouts, 'Jew, get off the pavement!'"- "And what did
you do?"- "I went into the street and picked up the cap," he calmly replied. That did not seem heroic on the part of the big, strong man who was
leading me, a little fellow, by the hand. I contrasted this situation, which did not please me, with another, more in harmony with my sentimentsthe scene in which Hannibal's father, Hamilcar Barcas, made his son swear before the household altar to take vengeance on the Romans.[15] Ever
since then Hannibal has had a place in my phantasies. -
I think I can trace my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian general still further back into my childhood, so that it is probably only an instance of an
already established emotional relation being transferred to a new vehicle. One of the first books which fell into my childish hands after I learned
to read was Thiers' Consulate and Empire. I remember that I pasted on the flat backs of my wooden soldiers little labels bearing the names of the
Imperial marshals, and that at that time Massena (as a Jew, Menasse) was already my avowed favourite.[16] This preference is doubtless also to
be explained by the fact of my having been born, a hundred years later, on the same date. Napoleon himself is associated with Hannibal through
the crossing of the Alps. And perhaps the development of this martial ideal may be traced yet farther back, to the first three years of my
childhood, to wishes which my alternately friendly and hostile relations with a boy a year older than myself must have evoked in the weaker of
the two playmates. -
The deeper we go into the analysis of dreams, the more often are we put on the track of childish experiences which play the part of dream-sources
in the latent dream-content.
We have learned that dreams very rarely reproduce memories in such a manner as to constitute, unchanged and unabridged, the sole manifest
dream-content. Nevertheless, a few authentic examples which show such reproduction have been recorded, and I can add a few new ones, which
once more refer to scenes of childhood. In the case of one of my patients a dream once gave a barely distorted reproduction of a sexual incident,
which was immediately recognized as an accurate recollection. The memory of it had never been completely lost in the waking life, but it had
been greatly obscured, and it was revivified by the previous work of analysis. The dreamer had at the age of twelve visited a bedridden
schoolmate, who had exposed himself, probably only by a chance movement in bed. At the sight of the boy's genitals he was seized by a kind of
compulsion, exposed himself, and took hold of the member of the other boy who, however, looked at him in surprise and indignation, whereupon
he became embarrassed and let it go. A dream repeated this scene twenty-three years later, with all the details of the accompanying emotions,
changing it, however, in this respect, that the dreamer played the passive instead of the active role, while the person of the schoolmate was
replaced by a contemporary.
As a rule, of course, a scene from childhood is represented in the manifest dream-content only by an allusion, and must be disentangled from the
dream by interpretation. The citation of examples of this kind cannot be very convincing, because any guarantee that they are really experiences
of childhood is lacking; if they belong to an earlier period of life, they are no longer recognized by our memory. The conclusion that such childish
experiences recur at all in dreams is justified in psychoanalytic work by a great number of factors, which in their combined results appear to be
sufficiently reliable. But when, for the purposes of dream-interpretation, such references to childish experiences are torn out of their context, they
may not perhaps seem very impressive, especially where I do not even give all the material upon which the interpretation is based. However, I
shall not let this deter me from giving a few examples. -
I.
With one of my female patients all dreams have the character of hurry; she is hurrying so as to be in time, so as not to miss her train, and so on. In
one dream she has to visit a girl friend; her mother had told her to ride and not walk; she runs, however, and keeps on calling. The material that
emerged in the analysis allowed one to recognize a memory of childish romping, and, especially for one dream, went back to the popular childish
game of rapidly repeating the words of a sentence as though it was all one word. All these harmless jokes with little friends were remembered
because they replaced other less harmless ones.[17] - 

The following dream was dreamed by another female patient: She is in a large room in which there are all sorts of machines; it is rather like what
she would imagine an orthopaedic institute to be. She hears that I am pressed for time, and that she must undergo treatment along with five others.
But she resists, and is unwilling to lie down on the bed- or whatever it is- which is intended for her. She stands in a corner, and waits for me to
say "It is not true." The others, meanwhile, laugh at her, saying it is all foolishness on her part. At the same time, it is as though she were called
upon to make a number of little squares.
The first part of the content of this dream is an allusion to the treatment and to the transference to myself. The second contains an allusion to a
scene of childhood; the two portions are connected by the mention of the bed. The orthopaedic institute is an allusion to one of my talks, in which 
I compared the treatment, with regard to its duration and its nature. to an orthopaedic treatment. At the beginning of the treatment I had to tell her
that for the present I had little time to give her, but that later on I would devote a whole hour to her daily. This aroused in her the old
sensitiveness, which is a leading characteristic of children who are destined to become hysterical. Their desire for love is insatiable. My patient
was the youngest of six brothers and sisters (hence, with five others), and as such her father's favourite, but in spite of this she seems to have felt
that her beloved father devoted far too little time and attention to her. Her waiting for me to say It is not trite was derived as follows: A little
tailor's apprentice had brought her a dress, and she had given him the money for it. Then she asked her husband whether she would have to pay
the money again if the boy were to lose it. To tease her, her husband answered "Yes" (the teasing in the dream), and she asked again and again,
and waited for him to say "It is not true." The thought of the latent dream- content may now be construed as follows: Will she have to pay me
double the amount when I devote twice as much time to her?- a thought which is stingy or filthy (the uncleanliness of childhood is often replaced
in dreams by greed for money; the word filthy here supplies the bridge). If all the passage referring to her waiting until I say It is not true is
intended in the dream as a circumlocution for the word dirty, the standingin-the-corner and not lying-down-on-the-bed are in keeping with this
word, as component parts of a scene of her childhood in which she had soiled her bed, in punishment for which she was put into the corner, with a
warning that papa would not love her any more, whereupon her brothers and sisters laughed at her, etc. The little squares refer to her young niece,
who showed her the arithmetical trick of writing figures in nine squares (I think) in such a way that on being added together in any direction they
make fifteen. -
III.
Here is a man's dream: He sees two boys tussling with each other; they are cooper's boys, as he concludes from the tools which are lying about;
one of the boys has thrown the other down; the prostrate boy is wearing ear-rings with blue stones. He runs towards the assailant with lifted cane,
in order to chastise him. The boy takes refuge behind a woman, as though she were his mother, who is standing against a wooden fence. She is
the wife of a day-labourer, and she turns her back to the man who is dreaming. Finally she turns about and stares at him with a horrible look, so
that he runs away in terror; the red flesh of the lower lid seems to stand out from her eyes.
This dream has made abundant use of trivial occurrences from the previous day, in the course of which he actually saw two boys in the street, one
of whom threw the other down. When he walked up to them in order to settle the quarrel, both of them took to their heels. Cooper's boys- this is
explained only by a
subsequent dream, in the analysis of which he used the proverbial expression: "To knock the bottom out of the barrel." Ear-rings with blue stones,
according to his observation, are worn chiefly by prostitutes. This suggests a familiar doggerel rhyme about two boys: "The other boy was called
Marie": that is, he was a girl. The woman standing by the fence: after the scene with the two boys he went for a walk along the bank of the
Danube and, taking advantage of being alone, urinated against a wooden fence. A little farther on a respectably dressed, elderly lady smiled at
him very pleasantly and wanted to hand him her card with her address.
Since, in the dream, the woman stood as he had stood while urinating, there is an allusion to a woman urinating, and this explains the horrible
look and the prominence of the red flesh, which can only refer to the genitals gaping in a squatting posture; seen in childhood, they had appeared
in later recollection as proud flesh, as a wound. The dream unites two occasions upon which, as a little boy, the dreamer was enabled to see the
genitals of little girls, once by throwing the little girl down, and once while the child was urinating; and, as is shown by another association, he
had retained in his memory the punishment administered or threatened by his father on account of these manifestations of sexual curiosity. -
IV.
A great mass of childish memories, which have been hastily combined into a phantasy, may be found behind the following dream of an elderly
lady: She goes out in a hurry to do some shopping. On the Graben she sinks to her knees as though she had broken down. A number of people
collect around her, especially cabdrivers, but no one helps her to get up. She makes many vain attempts; finally she must have succeeded, for she
is put into a cab which is to take her home. A large, heavily laden basket (something like a market- basket) is thrown after her through the
window.
This is the woman who is always harassed in her dreams; just as she used to be harassed when a child. The first situation of the dream is
apparently taken from the sight of a fallen horse; just as broken down points to horse-racing. In her youth she was a rider; still earlier she was
probably also a horse. With the idea of falling down is connected her first childish reminiscence of the seventeen-year-old son of the hall porter,
who had an epileptic seizure in the street and was brought home in a cab. Of this, of course, she had only heard, but the idea of epileptic fits, of
falling down, acquired a great influence over her phantasies, and later on influenced the form of her own hysterical attacks. When a person of the
female sex dreams of falling, this almost always has a sexual significance; she becomes a fallen woman, and, for the purpose of the dream under
consideration, this interpretation is probably the least doubtful, for she falls in the Graben, the street in Vienna which is known as the concourse
of prostitutes. The market-basket admits of more than one interpretation; in the sense of refusal (German, Korb = basket = snub, refusal) it
reminds her of the many snubs which she at first administered to her suitors and which, she thinks, she herself received later. This agrees with the
detail: no one will help her up, which she herself interprets as being disdained. Further, the market-basket recalls phantasies which have already
appeared in the course of analysis, in which she imagines that she has married far beneath her station and now goes to the market as a marketwoman. Lastly, the market- basket might be interpreted as the mark of a servant. This suggests further memories of her childhood- of a cook who 
was discharged because she stole; she, too, sank to her knees and begged for mercy. The dreamer was at that time twelve years of age. Then
emerges a recollection of a chamber-maid, who was dismissed because she had an affair with the coachman of the household, who, incidentally,
married her afterwards. This recollection, therefore, gives us a clue to the cab-drivers in the dream (who, in opposition to the reality, do not stand
by the fallen woman). But there still remains to be explained the throwing of the basket; in particular, why it is thrown through the window? This
reminds her of the forwarding of luggage by rail, to the custom of Fensterln[18] in the country, and to trivial impressions of a summer resort, of a
gentleman who threw some blue plums into the window of a lady's room, and of her little sister, who was frightened because an idiot who was
passing looked in at the window. And now, from behind all this emerges an obscure recollection from her tenth year of a nurse in the country to
whom one of the men-servants made love (and whose conduct the child may have noticed), and who was sent packing, thrown out, together with
her lover (in the dream we have the expression: thrown into); an incident which we have been approaching by several other paths. The luggage or
box of a servant is disparagingly described in Vienna as "seven plums." "Pack up your seven plums and get out!" -
My collection, of course, contains a plethora of such patients' dreams, the analysis of which leads back to impressions of childhood, often dating
back to the first three years of life, which are remembered obscurely, or not at all. But it is a questionable proceeding to draw conclusions from
these and apply them to dreams in general, for they are mostly dreams of neurotic, and especially hysterical, persons; and the part played in these
dreams by childish scenes might be conditioned by the nature of the neurosis, and not by the nature of dreams in general. In the interpretation of
my own dreams, however, which is assuredly not undertaken on account of grave symptoms of illness, it happens just as frequently that in the
latent dreamcontent I am unexpectedly confronted with a scene of my childhood, and that a whole series of my dreams will suddenly converge
upon the paths proceeding from a single childish experience. I have already given examples of this, and I shall give yet more in different
connections. Perhaps I cannot close this chapter more fittingly than by citing several dreams of my own, in which recent events and longforgotten experiences of my childhood appear together as dream-sources.
I.
After I have been travelling, and have gone to bed hungry and tired, the prime necessities of life begin to assert their claims in sleep, and I dream
as follows: I go into a kitchen in order to ask for some pudding. There three women are standing, one of whom is the hostess; she is rolling
something in her hands, as though she were making dumplings. She replies that I must wait until she has finished (not distinctly as a speech). I
become impatient, and go away affronted. I want to put on an overcoat; but the first I try on is too long. I take it off, and am somewhat astonished
to find that it is trimmed with fur. A second coat has a long strip of cloth with a Turkish design sewn into it. A stranger with a long face and a
short, pointed beard comes up and
prevents me from putting it on, declaring that it belongs to him. I now show him that it is covered all over with Turkish embroideries. He asks:
"How do the Turkish (drawings, strips of cloth...) concern you?" But we soon become quite friendly.
In the analysis of this dream I remember, quite unexpectedly, the first novel which I ever read, or rather, which I began to read from the end of the
first volume, when I was perhaps thirteen years of age. I have never learned the name of the novel, or that of its author, but the end remains
vividly in my memory. The hero becomes insane, and continually calls out the names of the three women who have brought the greatest
happiness and the greatest misfortune into his life. Pelagie is one of these names. I still do not know what to make of this recollection during the
analysis. Together with the three women there now emerge the three Parcae, who spin the fates of men, and I know that one of the three women,
the hostess in the dream, is the mother who gives life, and who, moreover, as in my own case, gives the child its first nourishment. Love and
hunger meet at the mother's breast. A young man- so runs an anecdote- who became a great admirer of womanly beauty, once observed, when the
conversation turned upon the handsome wet-nurse who had suckled him as a child, that he was sorry that he had not taken better advantage of his
opportunities. I am in the habit of using the anecdote to elucidate the factor of retrospective tendencies in the mechanism of the psychoneuroses.
One of the Parcae, then, is rubbing the palms of her hands together, as though she were making dumplings. A strange occupation for one of the
Fates, and urgently in need of explanation! This explanation is furnished by another and earlier memory of my childhood. When I was six years
old, and receiving my first lessons from my mother, I was expected to believe that we are made of dust, and must, therefore, return to dust. But
this did not please me, and I questioned the doctrine. Thereupon my mother rubbed the palms of her hands together-just as in making dumplings,
except that there was no dough between them- and showed me the blackish scales of epidermis which were thus rubbed off, as a proof that it is of
dust that we are made. Great was my astonishment at this demonstration ad oculos, and I acquiesced in the idea which I was later to hear
expressed in the words: "Thou owest nature a death."[19] Thus the women to whom I go in the kitchen, as I so often did in my childhood when I
was hungry and my mother, sitting by the fire, admonished me to wait until lunch was ready, are really the Parcae. And now for the dumplings!
At least one of my teachers at the University- the very one to whom I am indebted for my histological knowledge (epidermis)- would be reminded
by the name Knodl (Knodl means dumpling), of a person whom he had to prosecute for plagiarizing his writings. Committing a plagiarism, taking
anything one can lay hands on, even though it belongs to another, obviously leads to the second part of the dream, in which I am treated like the
overcoat thief who for some time plied his trade in the lecture halls. I have written the word plagiarism- without definite intention- because it
occurred to me, and now I see that it must belong to the latent dream-content and that it will serve as a bridge between the different parts of the
manifest dream-content. The chain of associations- Pelagie- plagiarism- plagiostomi[20] (sharks)- fish-bladder- connects the old novel with the
affair of Knodl and the overcoats (German: Uberzieher = pullover, overcoat or condom), which obviously refer to an appliance appertaining to
the technique of sex. This, it is true, is a very forced and irrational connection, but it is nevertheless one which I could not have established in
waking life if it had not already been established by the dream-work. Indeed, as though nothing were sacred to this impulse to enforce
associations, the beloved name, Brucke (bridge of words, see above), now serves to remind me of the very institute in which I spent my happiest 
hours as a student, wanting for nothing. "So will you at the breasts of Wisdom every day more pleasure find"), in the most complete contrast to
the desires which plague me (German: plagen) while I dream. And finally, there emerges the recollection of another dear teacher, whose name
once more sounds like something edible (Fleischl- Fleisch = meat- like Knodl = dumplings), and of a pathetic scene in which the scales of
epidermis play a part (mother- hostess), and mental derangement (the novel), and a remedy from the Latin pharmacopeia (Kuche = kitchen)
which numbs the sensation of hunger, namely, cocaine.
In this manner I could follow the intricate trains of thought still farther, and could fully elucidate that part of the dream which is lacking in the
analysis; but I must refrain, because the personal sacrifice which this would involve is too great. I shall take up only one of the threads, which will
serve to lead us directly to one of the dream-thoughts that lie at the bottom of the medley. The stranger with the long face and pointed beard, who
wants to prevent me from putting on the overcoat, has the features of a tradesman of Spalato, of whom my wife bought a great deal of Turkish
cloth. His name was Popovic, a suspicious name, which even gave the humorist Stettenheim a pretext for a suggestive remark: "He told me his
name, and blushingly shook my hand."[21] For the rest, I find the same misuse of names as above in the case of Pelagie, Knodl, Brucke, Fleischl.
No one will deny that such playing with names is a childish trick; if I indulge in it the practice amounts to an act of retribution, for my own name
has often enough been the subject of such feeble attempts at wit. Goethe once remarked how sensitive a man is in respect to his name, which he
feels that he fills even as he fills his skin; Herder having written the following lines on his name:
Der du von Gottern abstammst, von Gothen oder vom Kote.
So seid ihr Gotterbilder auch zu Staub. -
[Thou who art born of the gods, of the Goths, or of the mud. Thus are thy godlike images even dust.] -
I realize that this digression on the misuse of names was intended merely to justify this complaint. But here let us stop.... The purchase at Spalato
reminds me of another purchase at Cattaro, where I was too cautious, and missed the opportunity of making an excellent bargain. (Missing an
opportunity at the breast of the wet- nurse; see above.) One of the dream-thoughts occasioned by the sensation of hunger really amounts to this:
We should let nothing escape; we should take what we can get, even if we do a little wrong; we should never let an opportunity go by; life is so
short, and death inevitable. Because this is meant even sexually, and because desire is unwilling to check itself before the thought of doing wrong,
this philosophy of carpe diem has reason to fear the censorship, and must conceal itself behind a dream. And so all sorts of counter-thoughts find
expression, with recollections of the time when spiritual nourishment alone was sufficient for the dreamer, with hindrances of every kind and
even threats of disgusting sexual punishments. -
II.
A second dream requires a longer preliminary statement:
I had driven to the Western Station in order to start on a holiday trip to the Aussee, but I went on to the platform in time for the Ischl train, which
leaves earlier. There I saw Count Thun, who was again going to see the Emperor at Ischl. In spite of the rain he arrived in an open carriage, came
straight through the entrance- gate for the local trains, and with a curt gesture and not a word of explanation he waved back the gatekeeper, who
did not know him and wanted to take his ticket. After he had left in the Ischl train, I was asked to leave the platform and return to the waitingroom; but after some difficulty I obtained permission to remain. I passed the time noting how many people bribed the officials to secure a
compartment; I fully intended to make a complaint- that is, to demand the same privilege. Meanwhile I sang something to myself, which I
afterwards recognized as the aria from The Marriage of Figaro: -
If my lord Count would tread a measure, tread a measure, Let him but say his pleasure,
And I will play the tune. -
(Possibly another person would not have recognized the tune.) The whole evening I was in a high-spirited, pugnacious mood; I chaffed the waiter
and the cab-driver, I hope without hurting their feelings; and now all kinds of bold and revolutionary thoughts came into my mind, such as would
fit themselves to the words of Figaro, and to memories of Beaumarchais' comedy, of which I had seen a performance at the Comedie Francaise.
The speech about the great men who have taken the trouble to be born; the seigneurial right which Count Almaviva wishes to exercise with regard
to Susanne; the jokes which our malicious Opposition journalists make on the name of Count Thun (German, thun = do), calling him Graf
Nichtsthun, Count-Do-Nothing. I really do not envy him; he now has a difficult audience with the Emperor before him, and it is I who am the real
Count-Do-Nothing, for I am going off for a holiday. I make all sorts of amusing plans for the vacation. Now a gentleman arrives whom I know as
a Government representative at the medical examinations, and who has won the flattering nickname of "the Governmental bed-fellow" (literally,
by-sleeper) by his activities in this capacity. By insisting on his official status he secured half a first-class compartment, and I heard one guard say
to another: "Where are we going to put the gentleman with the first-class half-compartment?" A pretty sort of favouritism! I am paying for a
whole first-class compartment. I did actually get a whole compartment to myself, but not in a through carriage, so there was no lavatory at my
disposal during the night. My complaints to the guard were fruitless; I revenged myself by suggesting that at least a hole be made in the floor of 
this compartment, to serve the possible needs of passengers. At a quarter to three in the morning I wake, with an urgent desire to urinate, from the
following dream:
A crowd, a students' meeting.... A certain Count (Thun or Taaffe) is making a speech. Being asked to say something about the Germans, he
declares, with a contemptuous gesture, that their favourite flower is coltsfoot, and he then puts into his buttonhole something like a torn leaf,
really the crumpled skeleton of a leaf. I jump up, and I jump up,[22] but I am surprised at my implied attitude. Then, more indistinctly: It seems
as though this were the vestibule (Aula); the exits are thronged, and one must escape. I make my way through a suite of handsomely appointed
rooms, evidently ministerial apartments, with furniture of a colour between brown and violet, and at last I come to a corridor in which a
housekeeper, a fat, elderly woman, is seated. I try to avoid speaking to her, but she apparently thinks I have a right to pass this way, because she
asks whether she shall accompany me with the lamp. I indicate with a gesture, or tell her, that she is to remain standing on the stairs, and it seems
to me that I am very clever, for after all I am evading detection. Now I am downstairs, and I find a narrow, steeply rising path, which I follow. -
Again indistinctly: It is as though my second task were to get away from the city, just as my first was to get out of the building. I am riding in a
one-horse cab, and I tell the driver to take me to a railway station. "I can't drive with you on the railway line itself," I say, when he reproaches me
as though I had tired him out. Here it seems as though I had already made a journey in his cab which is usually made by rail. The stations are
crowded; I am wondering whether to go to Krems or to Znaim, but I reflect that the Court will be there, and I decide in favour of Graz or some
such place. Now I am seated in the railway carriage, which is rather like a tram, and I have in my buttonhole a peculiar long braided thing, on
which are violet-brown violets of stiff material, which makes a great impression on people. Here the scene breaks off.
I am once more in front of the railway station, but I am in the company of an elderly gentleman. I think out a scheme for remaining unrecognized,
but I see this plan already being carried out. Thinking and experiencing are here, as it were, the same thing. He pretends to be blind, at least in one
eye, and I hold before him a male glass urinal (which we have to buy in the city, or have bought). I am thus a sick-nurse, and have to give him the
urinal because he is blind. If the conductor sees us in this position, he must pass us by without drawing attention to us. At the same time the
position of the elderly man, and his urinating organ, is plastically perceived. Then I wake with a desire to urinate.
The whole dream seems a sort of phantasy, which takes the dreamer back to the year of revolution, 1848, the memory of which had been revived
by the jubilee of 1898, as well as by a little excursion to Wachau, on which I visited Emmersdorf, the refuge of the student leader Fischof,[23] to
whom several features of the manifest dream- content might refer. The association of ideas then leads me to England, to the house of my brother,
who used in jest to twit his wife with the title of Tennyson's poem Fifty Years Ago, whereupon the children were used to correct him: Fifteen
Years Ago. This phantasy, however, which attaches itself to the thoughts evoked by the sight of Count Thun, is, like the facade of an Italian
church, without organic connection with the structure behind it, but unlike such a facade it is full of gaps, and confused, and in many places
portions of the interior break through. The first situation of the dream is made up of a number of scenes, into which I am able to dissect it. The
arrogant attitude of the Count in the dream is copied from a scene at my school which occurred in my fifteenth year. We had hatched a conspiracy
against an unpopular and ignorant teacher; the leading spirit in this conspiracy was a schoolmate who since that time seems to have taken Henry
VIII of England as his model. It fell to me to carry out the coup d'etat, and a discussion of the importance of the Danube (German, Donau) to
Austria (Wachau!) was the occasion of an open revolt. One of our fellow-conspirators was our only aristocratic schoolmate- he was called "the
giraffe" on account of his conspicuous height- and while he was being reprimanded by the tyrant of the school, the professor of the German
language, he stood just as the Count stood in the dream. The explanation of the favourite flower, and the putting into a button-hole of something
that must have been a flower (which recalls the orchids which I had given that day to a friend, and also a rose of Jericho) prominently recalls the
incident in Shakespeare's historical play which opens the civil wars of the Red and the White Roses; the mention of Henry VIII has paved the way
to this reminiscence. Now it is not very far from roses to red and white carnations. (Meanwhile two little rhymes, the one German, the other
Spanish, insinuate themselves into the analysis: Rosen, Tulpen, Nelken, alle Blumen welken, [24] and Isabelita, no llores, que se marchitan las
flores.[25] The Spanish line occurs in Figaro.) Here in Vienna white carnations have become the badge of the Anti-Semites, red ones of the Social
Democrats. Behind this is the recollection of an anti-Semitic challenge during a railway journey in beautiful Saxony (Anglo Saxon). The third
scene contributing to the formation of the first situation in the dream dates from my early student days. There was a debate in a German students'
club about the relation of philosophy to the general sciences. Being a green youth, full of materialistic doctrines, I thrust myself forward in order
to defend an extremely one-sided position. Thereupon a sagacious older fellow- student, who has since then shown his capacity for leading men
and organizing the masses, and who, moreover, bears a name belonging to the animal kingdom, rose and gave us a thorough dressing-down; he
too, he said, had herded swine in his youth, and had then returned repentant to his father's house. I jumped up (as in the dream), became piggishly
rude, and retorted that since I knew he had herded swine, I was not surprised at the tone of his discourse. (In the dream I am surprised at my
German Nationalistic feelings.) There was a great commotion, and an almost general demand that I should retract my words, but I stood my
ground. The insulted student was too sensible to take the advice which was offered him, that he should send me a challenge, and let the matter
drop. -
The remaining elements of this scene of the dream are of more remote origin. What does it mean that the Count should make a scornful reference
to coltsfoot? Here I must question my train of associations. Coltsfoot (German: Huflattich), Lattice (lettuce), Salathund (the dog that grudges
others what he cannot eat himself). Here plenty of opprobrious epithets may be discerned: Gir-affe (German: Affe = monkey, ape), pig, sow, dog;
I might even arrive, by way of the name, at donkey, and thereby pour contempt upon an academic professor. Furthermore, I translate coltsfoot
(Huflattich)- I do not know whether I do so correctly- by pisse-en-lit. I get this idea from Zola's Germinal, in which some children are told to
bring some dandelion salad with them. The dog- chien- has a name sounding not unlike the verb for the major function (chier, as pisser stands for 
the minor one). Now we shall soon have the indecent in all its three physical categories, for in the same Germinal, which deals with the future
revolution, there is a description of a very peculiar contest, which relates to the production of the gaseous excretions known as flatus.[26] And
now I cannot but observe how the way to this flatus has been prepared a long while since, beginning with the flowers, and proceeding to the
Spanish rhyme of Isabelita, to Ferdinand and Isabella, and, by way of Henry VIII, to English history at the time of the Armada, after the
victorious termination of which the English struck a medal with the inscription: Flavit et dissipati sunt, for the storm had scattered the Spanish
fleet. [27] I had thought of using this phrase, half jestingly, as the title of a chapter on "Therapy," if I should ever succeed in giving a detailed
account of my conception and treatment of hysteria. -
I cannot give so detailed an interpretation of the second scene of the dream, out of sheer regard for the censorship. For at this point I put myself in
the place of a certain eminent gentleman of the revolutionary period, who had an adventure with an eagle (German: Adler) and who is said to
have suffered from incontinence of the bowels, incontinentia and, etc.; and here I believe that I should not be justified in passing the censorship,
even though it was an aulic councillor (aula, consiliarizis aulicus) who told me the greater part of this history. The suite of rooms in the dream is
suggested by his Excellency's private saloon carriage, into which I was able to glance; but it means, as it so often does in dreams, a woman.[28]
The personality of the housekeeper is an ungrateful allusion to a witty old lady, which ill repays her for the good times and the many good stories
which I have enjoyed in her house. The incident of the lamp goes back to Grillparzer, who notes a charming experience of a similar nature, of
which he afterwards made use in Hero and Leander (the waves of the sea and of love- the Armada and the storm). -
I must forego a detailed analysis of the two remaining portions of the dream; I shall single out only those elements which lead me back to the two
scenes of my childhood for the sake of which alone I have selected the dream. The reader will rightly assume that it is sexual material which
necessitates the suppression; but he may not be content with this explanation. There are many things of which one makes no secret to oneself, but
which must be treated as secrets in addressing others, and here we are concerned not with the reasons which induce me to conceal the solution,
but with the motive of the inner censorship which conceals the real content of the dream even from myself. Concerning this, I will confess that
the analysis reveals these three portions of the dream as impertinent boasting, the exuberance of an absurd megalomania, long ago suppressed in
my waking life, which, however, dares to show itself, with individual ramifications, even in the manifest dream- content (it seems to me that I am
a cunning fellow), making the high-spirited mood of the evening before the dream perfectly intelligible.
Boasting of every kind, indeed thus, the mention of Graz points to the phrase: "What price Graz?" which one is wont to use when one feels
unusually wealthy. Readers who recall Master Rabelais's inimitable description of the life and deeds of Gargantua and his son Pantagruel will be
able to enroll even the suggested content of the first portion of the dream among the boasts to which I have alluded. But the following belongs to
the two scenes of childhood of which I have spoken: I had bought a new trunk for this journey, the colour of which, a brownish violet, appears in
the dream several times (violet-brown violets of a stiff cloth, on an object which is known as a girl-catcher- the furniture in the ministerial
chambers). Children, we know, believe that one attracts people's attention with anything new. Now I have been told of the following incident of
my childhood; my recollection of the occurrence itself has been replaced by my recollection of the story. I am told that at the age of two I still
used occasionally to wet my bed, and that when I was reproved for doing so I consoled my father by promising to buy him a beautiful new red
bed in N (the nearest large town). Hence, the interpolation in the dream, that we had bought the urinal in the city or had to buy it; one must keep
one's promises. (One should note, moreover, the association of the male urinal and the woman's trunk, box.) All the megalomania of the child is
contained in this promise. The significance of dreams of urinary difficulties in the case of children has already been considered in the
interpretation of an earlier dream (cf. the dream in chapter V., A.). The psycho-analysis of neurotics has taught us to recognize the intimate
connection between wetting the bed and the character trait of ambition.
Then, when I was seven or eight years of age another domestic incident occurred which I remember very well. One evening, before going to bed,
I had disregarded the dictates of discretion, and had satisfied my needs in my parents' bedroom, and in their presence. Reprimanding me for this
delinquency, my father remarked: "That boy will never amount to anything." This must have been a terrible affront to my ambition, for allusions
to this scene recur again and again in my dreams, and are constantly coupled with enumerations of my accomplishments and successes, as though
I wanted to say: "You see, I have amounted to something after all." This childish scene furnishes the elements for the last image of the dream, in
which the roles are interchanged, of course for the purpose of revenge. The elderly man obviously my father, for the blindness in one eye signifies
his one-sided glaucoma,[29] is now urinating before me as I once urinated before him. By means of the glaucoma I remind my father of cocaine,
which stood him in good stead during his operation, as though I had thereby fulfilled my promise. Besides, I make sport of him; since he is blind,
I must hold the glass in front of him, and I delight in allusions to my knowledge of the theory of hysteria, of which I am proud. [30]
If the two childish scenes of urination are, according to my theory, closely associated with the desire for greatness, their resuscitation on the
journey to the Aussee was further favoured by the accidental circumstance that my compartment had no lavatory, and that I must be prepared to
postpone relief during the journey, as actually happened in the morning when I woke with the sensation of a bodily need. I suppose one might be
inclined to credit this sensation with being the actual stimulus of the dream; I should, however, prefer a different explanation, namely, that the
dream- thoughts first gave rise to the desire to urinate. It is quite unusual for me to be disturbed in sleep by any physical need, least of all at the
time when I woke on this occasion- a quarter to four in the morning. I would forestall a further objection by remarking that I have hardly ever felt
a desire to urinate after waking early on other journeys made under more comfortable circumstances. However, I can leave this point undecided
without weakening my argument. 
Further, since experience in dream-analysis has drawn my attention to the fact that even from dreams the interpretation of which seems at first
sight complete, because the dream-sources and the wish- stimuli are easily demonstrable, important trains of thought proceed which reach back
into the earliest years of childhood, I had to ask myself whether this characteristic does not even constitute an essential condition of dreaming. If
it were permissible to generalize this notion, I should say that every dream is connected through its manifest content with recent experiences,
while through its latent content it is connected with the most remote experiences; and I can actually show in the analysis of hysteria that these
remote experiences have in a very real sense remained recent right up to the present. But I still find it very difficult to prove this conjecture; I
shall have to return to the probable role in dream-formation of the earliest experiences of our childhood in another connection (chapter VII).
Of the three peculiarities of the dream-memory considered above, one- the preference for the unimportant in the dream-content- has been
satisfactorily explained by tracing it back to dream distortion. We have succeeded in establishing the existence of the other two peculiarities- the
preferential selection of recent and also of infantile material- but we have found it impossible to derive them from the motives of the dream. Let
us keep in mind these two characteristics, which we still have to explain or evaluate; a place will have to be found for them elsewhere, either in
the discussion of the psychology of the sleeping state, or in the consideration of the structure of the psychic apparatus- which we shall undertake
later after we have seen that by means of dream-interpretation we are able to glance as through an inspection- hole into the interior of this
apparatus.
But here and now I will emphasize another result of the last few dream-analyses. The dream often appears to have several meanings; not only
may several wish-fulfilments be combined in it, as our examples show, but one meaning or one wish-fulfilment may conceal another. until in the
lowest stratum one comes upon the fulfilment of a wish from the earliest period of childhood; and here again it may be questioned whether the
word often at the beginning of this sentence may not more correctly be replaced by constantly.[31]

If we attempt to interest a cultured layman in the problems of dreams, and if, with this end in view, we ask him what he believes to be the source
of dreams, we shall generally find that he feels quite sure he knows at least this part of the solution. He thinks immediately of the influence
exercised on the formation of dreams by a disturbed or impeded digestion ("Dreams come from the stomach"), an accidental position of the body,
a trifling occurrence during sleep. He does not seem to suspect that even after all these factors have been duly considered something still remains
to be explained.
In the introductory chapter we examined at length the opinion of scientific writers on the role of somatic stimuli in the formation of dreams, so
that here we need only recall the results of this inquiry. We have seen that three kinds of somatic stimuli will be distinguished: the objective
sensory stimuli which proceed from external objects, the inner states of excitation of the sensory organs, having only a subjective reality, and the
bodily stimuli arising within the body; and we have also noticed that the writers on dreams are inclined to thrust into the background any psychic
sources of dreams which may operate simultaneously with the somatic stimuli, or to exclude them altogether. In testing the claims made on behalf
of these somatic stimuli we have learned that the significance of the objective excitation of the sensory organs- whether accidental stimuli
operating during sleep, or such as cannot be excluded from the dormant relation of these dream-images and ideas to the internal bodily stimuli
and confirmed by experiment; that the part played by the subjective sensory stimuli appears to be demonstrated by the recurrence of hypnagogic
sensory images in dreams; and that, although the broadly accepted relation of these dream-images and ideas to the internal bodily stimuli cannot
be exhaustively demonstrated, it is at all events confirmed by the well-known influence which an excited state of the digestive, urinary and sexual
organs exercises upon the content of our dreams.
Nerve stimulus and bodily stimulus would thus be the anatomical sources of dreams; that is, according to many writers, the sole and exclusive
sources of dreams.
But we have already considered a number of doubtful points, which seem to question not so much the correctness of the somatic theory as its
adequacy.
However confident the representatives of this theory may be of its factual basis- especially in respect of the accidental and external nerve stimuli,
which may without difficulty be recognized in the dream-content- nevertheless they have all come near to admitting that the rich content of ideas
found in dreams cannot be derived from the external nerve-stimuli alone. In this connection Miss Mary Whiton Calkins tested her own dreams,
and those of a second person, for a period of six weeks, and found that the element of external sensory perception was demonstrable in only 13.2
per cent and 6.7 percent of these dreams respectively. Only two dreams in the whole collection could be referred to organic sensations. These
statistics confirm what a cursory survey of our own experience would already, have led us to suspect.
A distinction has often been made between nerve-stimulus dreams which have already been thoroughly investigated, and other forms of dreams.
Spitta, for example, divided dreams into nervestimulus dreams and association-dreams. But it was obvious that this solution remained
unsatisfactory unless the link between the somatic sources of dreams and their ideational content could be indicated. 
In addition to the first objection, that of the insufficient frequency of the external sources of stimulus, a second objection presents itself, namely,
the inadequacy of the explanations of dreams afforded by this category of dream-sources. There are two things which the representatives of this
theory have failed to explain: firstly, why the true nature of the external stimulus is not recognized in the dream, but is constantly mistaken for
something else; and secondly, why the result of the reaction of the perceiving mind to this misconceived stimulus should be so indeterminate and
variable. We have seen that Strumpell, in answer to these questions, asserts that the mind, since it turns away from the outer world during sleep, is
not in a position to give the correct interpretation of the objective sensory stimulus, but is forced to construct illusions on the basis of the
indefinite stimulation arriving from many directions. In his own words (Die Natur und Entstehung der Traume, p. 108).
"When by an external or internal nerve-stimulus during sleep a feeling, or a complex of feelings, or any sort of psychic process arises in the mind,
and is perceived by the mind, this process calls up from the mind perceptual images belonging to the sphere of the waking experiences, that is to
say, earlier perceptions, either unembellished, or with the psychic values appertaining to them. It collects about itself, as it were, a greater or
lesser number of such images, from which the impression resulting from the nerve-stimulus receives its psychic value. In this connection it is
commonly said, as in ordinary language we say of the waking procedure, that the mind interprets in sleep the impressions of nervous stimuli. The
result of this interpretation is the socalled nerve-stimulus dream- that is, a dream the components of which are conditioned by the fact that a nervestimulus produces its psychical effect in the life of the mind in accordance with the laws of reproduction."
In all essential points identical with this doctrine is Wundt's statement that the concepts of dreams proceed, at all events for the most part, from
sensory stimuli, and especially from the stimuli of general sensation, and are therefore mostly phantastic illusions- probably only to a small extent
pure memoryconceptions raised to the condition of hallucinations. To illustrate the relation between dream-content and dream-stimuli which
follows from this theory, Strumpell makes use of an excellent simile. It is "as though ten fingers of a person ignorant of music were to stray over
the keyboard of an instrument." The implication is that the dream is not a psychic phenomenon, originating from psychic motives, but the result
of a physiological stimulus, which expresses itself in psychic symptomatology because the apparatus affected by the stimulus is not capable of
any other mode of expression. Upon a similar assumption is based the explanation of obsessions which Meynert attempted in his famous simile of
the dial on which individual figures are most deeply embossed.
Popular though this theory of the somatic dream-stimuli has become, and seductive though it may seem, it is none the less easy to detect its weak
point. Every somatic dream-stimulus which provokes the psychic apparatus in sleep to interpretation by the formation of illusions may evoke an
incalculable number of such attempts at interpretation. It may consequently be represented in the dream- content by an extraordinary number of
different concepts.[32] But the theory of Strumpell and Wundt cannot point to any sort of motive which controls the relation between the external
stimulus and the dream-concept chosen to interpret it, and therefore it cannot explain the "peculiar choice" which the stimuli "often enough make
in the course of their productive activity" (Lipps, Grundtatsachen des Seelen-lebens, p. 170). Other objections may be raised against the
fundamental assumption behind the theory of illusions- the assumption that during sleep the mind is not in a condition to recognize the real nature
of the objective sensory stimuli. The old physiologist Burdach shows us that the mind is quite capable even during sleep of a correct interpretation
of the sensory impressions which reach it, and of reacting in accordance with this correct interpretation, inasmuch as he demonstrates that certain
sensory impressions which seem important to the individual may be excepted from the general neglect of the sleeping mind (as in the example of
nurse and child), and that one is more surely awakened by one's own name than by an indifferent auditory impression; all of which presupposes,
of course, that the mind discriminates between sensations, even in sleep. Burdach infers from these observations that we must not assume that the
mind is incapable of interpreting sensory stimuli in the sleeping state, but rather that it is not sufficiently interested in them. The arguments which
Burdach employed in 1830 reappear unchanged in the works of Lipps (in the year 1883), where they are employed for the purpose of attacking
the theory of somatic stimuli. According to these arguments the mind seems to be like the sleeper in the anecdote, who, on being asked, "Are you
asleep?" answers "No," and on being again addressed with the words: "Then lend me ten florins," takes refuge in the excuse: "I am asleep."
The inadequacy of the theory of somatic dream-stimuli may be further demonstrated in another way. Observation shows that external stimuli do
not oblige me to dream, even though these stimuli appear in the dream-content as soon as I begin to dream- supposing that I do dream. In
response to a touch or pressure stimulus experienced while I am asleep, a variety of reactions are at my disposal. I may overlook it, and find on
waking that my leg has become uncovered, or that I have been lying on an arm; indeed, pathology offers me a host of examples of powerfully
exciting sensory and motor stimuli of different kinds which remain ineffective during sleep. I may perceive the sensation during sleep, and
through my sleep, as it were, as constantly happens in the case of pain stimuli, but without weaving the pain into the texture of a dream. And
thirdly, I may wake up in response to the stimulus, simply in order to avoid it. Still another, fourth, reaction is possible: namely, that the
nervestimulus may cause me to dream; but the other possible reactions occur quite as frequently as the reaction of dream-formation. This,
however, would not be the case if the incentive to dreaming did not lie outside the somatic dream-sources.
Appreciating the importance of the above-mentioned lacunae in the explanation of dreams by somatic stimuli, other writers- Scherner, for
example, and, following him, the philosopher Volkelt- endeavoured to determine more precisely the nature of the psychic activities which cause
the many-coloured images of our dreams to proceed from the somatic stimuli, and in so doing they approached the problem of the essential nature
of dreams as a problem of psychology, and regarded dreaming as a psychic activity. Scherner not only gave a poetical, vivid and glowing
description of the psychic peculiarities which unfold themselves in the course of dream-formation, but he also believed that he had hit upon the
principle of the method the mind employs in dealing with the stimuli which are offered to it. The dream, according to Scherner, in the free activity
of the phantasy, which has been released from the shackles imposed upon it during the day, strives to represent symbolically the nature of the 
organ from which the stimulus proceeds. Thus there exists a sort of dream-book, a guide to the interpretation of dreams, by means of which
bodily sensations, the conditions of the organs, and states of stimulation, may be inferred from the dream-images. "Thus the image of a cat
expressed extreme ill-temper; the image of pale, smooth pastry the nudity of the body. The human body as a whole is pictured by the phantasy of
the dream as a house, and the individual organs of the body as parts of the house. In toothache-dreams a vaulted vestibule corresponds to the
mouth, and a staircase to the descent from the pharynx to the oesophagus; in the headache-dream a ceiling covered with disgusting toad-like
spiders is chosen to denote the upper part of the head." "Many different symbols are employed by our dreams for the same organ: thus the
breathing lung finds its symbol in a roaring stove, filled with flames, the heart in empty boxes and baskets, and the bladder in round, bag-shaped
or merely hollow objects. It is of particular significance that at the close of the dream the stimulating organ or its function is often represented
without disguise and usually on the dreamer's own body. Thus the toothache-dream commonly ends by the dreamer drawing a tooth out of his
mouth." It cannot be said that this theory of dream-interpretation has found much favour with other writers. It seems, above all, extravagant; and
so Scherner's readers have hesitated to give it even the small amount of credit to which it is, in my opinion, entitled. As will be seen, it tends to a
revival of dream-interpretation by means of symbolism, a method employed by the ancients; only the province from which the interpretation is to
be derived is restricted to the human body. The lack of a scientifically comprehensible technique of interpretation must seriously limit the
applicability of Scherner's theory. Arbitrariness in the interpretation of dreams would appear to be by no means excluded, especially since in this
case also a stimulus may be expressed in the dream-content by several representative symbols; thus even Scherner's follower Volkelt was unable
to confirm the representation of the body as a house. Another objection is that here again the dream-activity is regarded as a useless and aimless
activity of the mind, since, according to this theory, the mind is content with merely forming phantasies around the stimulus with which it is
dealing, without even remotely attempting to abolish the stimulus.
Scherner's theory of the symbolization of bodily stimuli by the dream is seriously damaged by yet another objection. These bodily stimuli are
present at all times, and it is generally assumed that the mind is more accessible to them during sleep than in the waking state. It is therefore
impossible to understand why the mind does not dream continuously all night long, and why it does not dream every night about all the organs. If
one attempts to evade this objection by positing the condition that special excitations must proceed from the eye, the ear, the teeth, the bowels,
etc., in order to arouse the dream-activity, one is confronted with the difficulty of proving that this increase of stimulation is objective; and proof
is possible only in a very few cases. If the dream of flying is a symbolization of the upward and downward motion of the pulmonary lobes, either
this dream, as has already been remarked by Strumpell, should be dreamt much oftener, or it should be possible to show that respiration is more
active during this dream. Yet a third alternative is possible- and it is the most probable of all- namely, that now and again special motives are
operative to direct the attention to the visceral sensations which are constantly present. But this would take us far beyond the scope of Scherner's
theory.
The value of Scherner's and Volkelt's disquisitions resides in their calling our attention to a number of characteristics of the dream-content which
are in need of explanation, and which seem to promise fresh discoveries. It is quite true that symbolizations of the bodily organs and functions do
occur in dreams: for example, that water in a dream often signifies a desire to urinate, that the male genital organ may be represented by an
upright staff, or a pillar, etc. With dreams which exhibit a very animated field of vision and brilliant colours, in contrast to the dimness of other
dreams, the interpretation that they are "dreams due to visual stimulation" can hardly be dismissed, nor can we dispute the participation of illusionformation in dreams which contain noise and a medley of voices. A dream like that of Scherner's, that two rows of fair handsome boys stood
facing one another on a bridge, attacking one another, and then resuming their positions, until finally the dreamer himself sat down on a bridge
and drew a long tooth from his jaw; or a similar dream of Volkelt's, in which two rows of drawers played a part, and which again ended in the
extraction of a tooth; dream-formations of this kind, of which both writers relate a great number, forbid our dismissing Scherner's theory as an
idle invention without seeking the kernel of truth which may be contained in it. We are therefore confronted with the task of finding a different
explanation of the supposed symbolization of the alleged dental stimulus.
Throughout our consideration of the theory of the somatic sources of dreams, I have refrained from urging the argument which arises from our
analyses of dreams. If, by a procedure which has not been followed by other writers in their investigation of dreams, we can prove that the dream
possesses intrinsic value as psychic action, that a wish supplies the motive of its formation, and that the experiences of the previous day furnish
the most obvious material of its content, any other theory of dreams which neglects such an important method of investigation- and accordingly
makes the dream appear a useless and enigmatical psychic reaction to somatic stimuli- may be dismissed without special criticism. For in this
case there would have to be- and this is highly improbable- two entirely different kinds of dreams, of which only one kind has come under our
observation, while the other kind alone has been observed by the earlier investigators. It only remains now to find a place in our theory of dreams
for the facts on which the current doctrine of somatic dream-stimuli is based.
We have already taken the first step in this direction in advancing the thesis that the dream-work is under a compulsion to elaborate into a unified
whole all the dream-stimuli which are simultaneously present (chapter V., A, above). We have seen that when two or more experiences capable of
making an impression on the mind have been left over from the previous day, the wishes that result from them are united into one dream;
similarly, that the impressions possessing psychic value and the indifferent experiences of the previous day unite in the dream-material, provided
that connecting ideas between the two can be established. Thus the dream appears to be a reaction to everything which is simultaneously present
as actual in the sleeping mind. As far as we have hitherto analysed the dreammaterial, we have discovered it to be a collection of psychic
remnants and memory-traces, which we were obliged to credit (on account of the preference shown for recent and for infantile material) with a
character of psychological actuality, though the nature of this actuality was not at the time determinable. We shall now have little difficulty in
predicting what will happen when to these actualities of the memory fresh material in the form of sensations is added during sleep. These stimuli, 
again, are of importance to the dream because they are actual; they are united with the other psychic actualities to provide the material for dreamformation. To express it in other words, the stimuli which occur during sleep are elaborated into a wish-fulfilment, of which the other components
are the psychic remnants of daily experience with which we are already familiar. This combination, however, is not inevitable; we have seen that
more than one kind of behaviour toward the physical stimuli received during sleep is possible. Where this combination is effected, a conceptual
material for the dream-content has been found which will represent both kinds of dream-sources, the somatic as well as the psychic.
The nature of the dream is not altered when somatic material is added to the psychic dream-sources; it still remains a wish fulfilment, no matter
how its expression is determined by the actual material available.
I should like to find room here for a number of peculiarities which are able to modify the significance of external stimuli for the dream. I imagine
that a co-operation of individual, physiological and accidental factors, which depend on the circumstances of the moment, determines how one
will behave in individual cases of more intensive objective stimulation during sleep; habitual or accidental profundity of sleep, in conjunction
with the intensity of the stimulus, will in one case make it possible so to suppress the stimulus that it will not disturb the sleeper, while in another
case it will force the sleeper to wake, or will assist the attempt to subdue the stimulus by weaving it into the texture of the dream. In accordance
with the multiplicity of these constellations, external objective stimuli will be expressed more rarely or more frequently in the case of one person
than in that of another. In my own case. since I am an excellent sleeper, and obstinately refuse to allow myself to be disturbed during sleep on any
pretext whatever, this intrusion of external causes of excitation into my dreams is very rare, whereas psychic motives apparently cause me to
dream very easily. Indeed, I have noted only a single dream in which an objective, painful source of stimulation is demonstrable, and it will be
highly instructive to see what effect the external stimulus had in this particular dream.
I am riding a gray horse, at first timidly and awkwardly, as though I were merely carried along. Then I meet a colleague, P, also on horseback,
and dressed in rough frieze; he is sitting erect in the saddle; he calls my attention to something (probably to the fact that I have a very bad seat).
Now I begin to feel more and more at ease on the back of my highly intelligent horse; I sit more comfortably, and I find that I am quite at home
up here. My saddle is a sort of pad, which completely fills the space between the neck and the rump of the horse. I ride between two vans, and
just manage to clear them. After riding up the street for some distance, I turn round and wish to dismount, at first in front of a little open chapel
which is built facing on to the street. Then I do really dismount in front of a chapel which stands near the first one; the hotel is in the same street; I
might let the horse go there by itself, but I prefer to lead it thither. It seems as though I should be ashamed to arrive there on horseback. In front of
the hotel there stands a page-boy, who shows me a note of mine which has been found, and ridicules me on account of it. On the note is written,
doubly underlined, "Eat nothing," and then a second sentence (indistinct): something like "Do not work"; at the same time a hazy idea that I am in
a strange city, in which I do not work.
It will not at once be apparent that this dream originated under the influence, or rather under the compulsion, of a painstimulus. The day before,
however, I had suffered from boils, which made every movement a torture, and at last a boil had grown to the size of an apple at the root of the
scrotum, and had caused me the most intolerable pains at every step; a feverish lassitude, lack of appetite, and the hard work which I had
nevertheless done during the day, had conspired with the pain to upset me. I was not altogether in a condition to discharge my duties as a
physician, but in view of the nature and the location of the malady, it was possible to imagine something else for which I was most of all unfit,
namely riding. Now it is this very activity of riding into which I am plunged by the dream; it is the most energetic denial of the pain which
imagination could conceive. As a matter of fact, I cannot ride; I do not dream of doing so; I never sat on a horse but once- and then without a
saddle- and I did not like it. But in this dream I ride as though I had no boil on the perineum; or rather, I ride, just because I want to have none. To
judge from the description, my saddle is the poultice which has enabled me to fall asleep. Probably, being thus comforted, I did not feel anything
of my pain during the first few hours of my sleep. Then the painful sensations made themselves felt, and tried to wake me; whereupon the dream
came and said to me, soothingly: "Go on sleeping, you are not going to wake! You have no boil, for you are riding on horseback, and with a boil
just there no one could ride!" And the dream was successful; the pain was stifled, and I went on sleeping.
But the dream was not satisfied with "suggesting away" the boil by tenaciously holding fast to an idea incompatible with the malady (thus
behaving like the hallucinatory insanity of a mother who has lost her child, or of a merchant who has lost his fortune). In addition, the details of
the sensation denied and of the image used to suppress it serve the dream also as a means to connect other material actually present in the mind
with the situation in the dream, and to give this material representation. I am riding on a gray horse- the colour of the horse exactly corresponds
with the pepper-and-salt suit in which I last saw my colleague P in the country. I have been warned that highly seasoned food is the cause of
boils, and in any case it is preferable as an aetiological explanation to sugar, which might be thought of in connection with furunculosis. My
friend P likes to ride the high horse with me ever since he took my place in the treatment of a female patient, in whose case I had performed great
feats (Kuntstucke: in the dream I sit the horse at first sideways, like a trick-rider, Kunstreiter), but who really, like the horse in the story of the
Sunday equestrian, led me wherever she wished. Thus the horse comes to be a symbolic representation of a lady patient (in the dream it is highly
intelligent). I feel quite at home refers to the position which I occupied in the patient's household until I was replaced by my colleague P. "I
thought you were safe in the saddle up there," one of my few wellwishers among the eminent physicians of the city recently said to me, with
reference to the same household. And it was a feat to practise psychotherapy for eight to ten hours a day, while suffering such pain, but I know
that I cannot continue my peculiarly strenuous work for any length of time without perfect physical health, and the dream is full of dismal
allusions to the situation which would result if my illness continued (the note, such as neurasthenics carry and show to their doctors): Do not
work, do not eat. On further interpretation I see that the dream activity has succeeded in finding its way from the wish-situation of riding to some
very early childish quarrels which must have occurred between myself and a nephew, who is a year older than I, and is now living in England. It 
has also taken up elements from my journeys in Italy: the street in the dream is built up out of impressions of Verona and Siena. A still deeper
interpretation leads to sexual dream-thoughts, and I recall what the dream allusions to that beautiful country were supposed to mean in the dream
of a female patient who had never been to Italy (to Italy, German: gen Italien = Genitalien = genitals); at the same time there are references to the
house in which I preceded my friend P as physician, and to the place where the boil is located.
In another dream, I was similarly successful in warding off a threatened disturbance of my sleep; this time the threat came from a sensory
stimulus. It was only chance, however, that enabled me to discover the connection between the dream and the accidental dream- stimulus, and in
this way to understand the dream. One midsummer morning in a Tyrolese mountain resort I woke with the knowledge that I had dreamed: The
Pope is dead. I was not able to interpret this short, non-visual dream. I could remember only one possible basis of the dream, namely, that shortly
before this the newspapers had reported that His Holiness was slightly indisposed. But in the course of the morning my wife asked me: "Did you
hear the dreadful tolling of the church bells this morning?" I had no idea that I had heard it, but now I understood my dream. It was the reaction of
my need for sleep to the noise by which the pious Tyroleans were trying to wake me. I avenged myself on them by the conclusion which formed
the content of my dream, and continued to sleep, without any further interest in the tolling of the bells.
Among the dreams mentioned in the previous chapters there are several which might serve as examples of the elaboration of so called nervestimuli. The dream of drinking in long draughts is such an example; here the somatic stimulus seems to be the sole source of the dream, and the
wish arising from the sensation- thirst- the only motive for dreaming. We find much the same thing in other simple dreams, where the somatic
stimulus is able of itself to generate a wish. The dream of the sick woman who throws the cooling apparatus from her cheek at night is an instance
of an unusual manner of reacting to a pain-stimulus with a wish fulfilment; it seems as though the patient had temporarily succeeded in making
herself analgesic, and accompanied this by ascribing her pains to a stranger.
My dream of the three Parcae is obviously a hunger-dream, but it has contrived to shift the need for food right back to the child's longing for its
mother's breast, and to use a harmless desire as a mask for a more serious one that cannot venture to express itself so openly. In the dream of
Count Thun we were able to see by what paths an accidental physical need was brought into relation with the strongest, but also the most
rigorously repressed impulses of the psychic life. And when, as in the case reported by Garnier, the First Consul incorporates the sound of an
exploding infernal machine into a dream of battle before it causes him to wake, the true purpose for which alone psychic activity concerns itself
with sensations during sleep is revealed with unusual clarity. A young lawyer, who is full of his first great bankruptcy case, and falls asleep in the
afternoon, behaves just as the great Napoleon did. He dreams of a certain G. Reich in Hussiatyn, whose acquaintance he has made in connection
with the bankruptcy case, but Hussiatyn (German: husten, to cough) forces itself upon his attention still further; he is obliged to wake, only to
hear his wife- who is suffering from bronchial catarrh- violently coughing.
Let us compare the dream of Napoleon I- who, incidentally, was an excellent sleeper- with that of the sleepy student, who was awakened by his
landlady with the reminder that he had to go to the hospital, and who thereupon dreamt himself into a bed in the hospital, and then slept on, the
underlying reasoning being as follows: If I am already in the hospital, I needn't get up to go there. This is obviously a convenience-dream; the
sleeper frankly admits to himself his motive in dreaming; but he thereby reveals one of the secrets of dreaming in general. In a certain sense, all
dreams are convenience-dreams; they serve the purpose of continuing to sleep instead of waking. The dream is the guardian of sleep, not its
disturber. In another place we shall have occasion to justify this conception in respect to the psychic factors that make for waking; but we can
already demonstrate its applicability to the objective external stimuli. Either the mind does not concern itself at all with the causes of sensations
during sleep, if it is able to carry this attitude through as against the intensity of the stimuli, and their significance, of which it is well aware; or it
employs the dream to deny these stimuli; or, thirdly, if it is obliged to recognize the stimuli, it seeks that interpretation of them which will
represent the actual sensation as a component of a desired situation which is compatible with sleep. The actual sensation is woven into the dream
in order to deprive it of its reality. Napoleon is permitted to go on sleeping; it is only a dream-memory of the thunder of the guns at Arcole which
is trying to disturb him.[33] -
The wish to sleep, to which the conscious ego has adjusted itself, and which (together with the dream-censorship and the "secondary elaboration"
to be mentioned later) represents the ego's contribution to the dream, must thus always be taken into account as a motive of dream-formation, and
every successful dream is a fulfilment of this wish. The relation of this general, constantly present, and unvarying sleep-wish to the other wishes
of which now one and now another is fulfilled by the dreamcontent, will be the subject of later consideration. In the wish to sleep we have
discovered a motive capable of supplying the deficiency in the theory of Strumpell and Wundt, and of explaining the perversity and
capriciousness of the interpretation of the external stimulus. The correct interpretation, of which the sleeping mind is perfectly capable, would
involve active interest, and would require the sleeper to wake; hence, of those interpretations which are possible at all, only such are admitted as
are acceptable to the dictatorial censorship of the sleep-wish. The logic of dream situations would run, for example: "It is the nightingale, and not
the lark." For if it is the lark, love's night is at an end. From among the interpretations of the stimulus which are thus admissible, that one is
selected which can secure the best connection with the wish- impulses that are lying in wait in the mind. Thus everything is definitely determined,
and nothing is left to caprice. The misinterpretation is not an illusion, but- if you will- an excuse. Here again, as in substitution by displacement in
the service of the dream-censorship, we have an act of deflection of the normal psychic procedure.
If the external nerve-stimuli and the inner bodily stimuli are sufficiently intense to compel psychic attention, they represent- that is, if they result
in dreaming at all, and not in waking- a fixed point for dream-formation, a nucleus in the dream-material, for which an appropriate wishfulfilment is sought, just as (see above) mediating ideas between two psychical dream-stimuli are sought. To this extent it is true of a number of 
dreams that the somatic element dictates the dream-content. In this extreme case even a wish that is not actually present may be aroused for the
purpose of dream-formation. But the dream cannot do otherwise than represent a wish in some situation as fulfilled; it is, as it were, confronted
with the task of discovering what wish can be represented as fulfilled by the given sensation. Even if this given material is of a painful or
disagreeable character, yet it is not unserviceable for the purposes of dream-formation. The psychic life has at its disposal even wishes whose
fulfilment evokes displeasure, which seems a contradiction, but becomes perfectly intelligible if we take into account the presence of two sorts of
psychic instance and the censorship that subsists between them.
In the psychic life there exist, as we have seen, repressed wishes, which belong to the first system, and to whose fulfilment the second system is
opposed. We do not mean this in a historic sense- that such wishes have once existed and have subsequently been destroyed. The doctrine of
repression, which we need in the study of psychoneuroses, asserts that such repressed wishes still exist, but simultaneously with an inhibition
which weighs them down. Language has hit upon the truth when it speaks of the suppression (sub-pression, or pushing under) of such impulses.
The psychic mechanism which enables such suppressed wishes to force their way to realization is retained in being and in working order. But if it
happens that such a suppressed wish is fulfilled, the vanquished inhibition of the second system (which is capable of consciousness) is then
expressed as discomfort. And, in order to conclude this argument: If sensations of a disagreeable character which originate from somatic sources
are present during sleep, this constellation is utilized by the dreamactivity to procure the fulfilment- with more or less maintenance of the
censorship- of an otherwise suppressed wish.
This state of affairs makes possible a certain number of anxiety dreams, while others of these dream-formations which are unfavourable to the
wish-theory exhibit a different mechanism. For the anxiety in dreams may of course be of a psychoneurotic character, originating in psychosexual excitation, in which case, the anxiety corresponds to repressed libido. Then this anxiety, like the whole anxiety-dream, has the significance
of a neurotic symptom, and we stand at the dividing-line where the wish- fulfilling tendency of dreams is frustrated. But in other anxiety- dreams
the feeling of anxiety comes from somatic sources (as in the case of persons suffering from pulmonary or cardiac trouble, with occasional
difficulty in breathing), and then it is used to help such strongly suppressed wishes to attain fulfilment in a dream, the dreaming of which from
psychic motives would have resulted in the same release of anxiety. It is not difficult to reconcile these two apparently contradictory cases. When
two psychic formations, an affective inclination and a conceptual content, are intimately connected, either one being actually present will evoke
the other, even in a dream; now the anxiety of somatic origin evokes the suppressed conceptual content, now it is the released conceptual content,
accompanied by sexual excitement, which causes the release of anxiety. In the one case, it may be said that a somatically determined affect is
psychically interpreted; in the other case, all is of psychic origin, but the content which has been suppressed is easily replaced by a somatic
interpretation which fits the anxiety. The difficulties which lie in the way of understanding all this have little to do with dreams; they are due to
the fact that in discussing these points we are touching upon the problems of the development of anxiety and of repression.
The general aggregate of bodily sensation must undoubtedly be included among the dominant dream-stimuli of internal bodily origin. Not that it
is capable of supplying the dream-content; but it forces the dream-thoughts to make a choice from the material destined to serve the purpose of
representation in the dream- content, inasmuch as it brings within easy reach that part of the material which is adapted to its own character, and
holds the rest at a distance. Moreover, this general feeling, which survives from the preceding day, is of course connected with the psychic
residues that are significant for the dream. Moreover, this feeling itself may be either maintained or overcome in the dream, so that it may, if it is
painful, veer round into its opposite.
If the somatic sources of excitation during sleep- that is, the sensations of sleep- are not of unusual intensity, the part which they play in dreamformation is, in my judgment, similar to that of those impressions of the day which are still recent, but of no great significance. I mean that they
are utilized for the dream formation if they are of such a kind that they can be united with the conceptual content of the psychic dream-source, but
not otherwise. They are treated as a cheap ever-ready material, which can be used whenever it is needed, and not as valuable material which itself
prescribes the manner in which it must be utilized. I might suggest the analogy of a connoisseur giving an artist a rare stone, a piece of onyx, for
example, in order that it may be fashioned into a work of art. Here the size of the stone, its colour, and its markings help to decide what head or
what scene shall be represented; while if he is dealing with a uniform and abundant material such as marble or sandstone, the artist is guided only
by the idea which takes shape in his mind. Only in this way, it seems to me, can we explain the fact that the dreamcontent furnished by physical
stimuli of somatic origin which are not unusually accentuated does not make its appearance in all dreams and every night.[34] -
Perhaps an example which takes us back to the interpretation of dreams will best illustrate my meaning. One day I was trying to understand the
significance of the sensation of being inhibited, of not being able to move from the spot, of not being able to get something done, etc., which
occurs so frequently in dreams, and is so closely allied to anxiety. That night I had the following dream: I am very incompletely dressed, and I go
from a flat on the ground- floor up a flight of stairs to an upper story. In doing this I jump up three stairs at a time, and I am glad to find that I can
mount the stairs so quickly. Suddenly I notice that a servant-maid is coming down the stairs- that is, towards me. I am ashamed, and try to hurry
away, and now comes this feeling of being inhibited; I am glued to the stairs, and cannot move from the spot.
Analysis: The situation of the dream is taken from an every-day reality. In a house in Vienna I have two apartments, which are connected only by
the main staircase. My consultation-rooms and my study are on the raised ground-floor, and my living-rooms are on the first floor. Late at night,
when I have finished my work downstairs, I go upstairs to my bedroom. On the evening before the dream I had actually gone this short distance
with my garments in disarray- that is, I had taken off my collar, tie and cuffs; but in the dream this had changed into a more advanced, but, as
usual, indefinite degree of undress. It is a habit of mine to run up two or three steps at a time; moreover, there was a wish-fulfilment recognized 
even in the dream, for the ease with which I run upstairs reassures me as to the condition of my heart. Further, the manner in which I run upstairs
is an effective contrast to the sensation of being inhibited, which occurs in the second half of the dream. It shows me- what needed no proof- that
dreams have no difficulty in representing motor actions fully and completely carried out; think, for example, of flying in dreams!
But the stairs up which I go are not those of my own house; at first I do not recognize them; only the person coming towards me informs me of
their whereabouts. This woman is the maid of an old lady whom I visit twice daily in order to give her hypodermic injections; the stairs, too, are
precisely similar to those which I have to climb twice a day in this old lady's house.
How do these stairs and this woman get into my dream? The shame of not being fully dressed is undoubtedly of a sexual character; the servant of
whom I dream is older than I, surly, and by no means attractive. These questions remind me of the following incident: When I pay my morning
visit at this house I am usually seized with a desire to clear my throat; the sputum falls on the stairs. There is no spittoon on either of the two
floors, and I consider that the stairs should be kept clean not at my expense, but rather by the provision of a spittoon. The housekeeper, another
elderly, curmudgeonly person, but, as I willingly admit, a woman of cleanly instincts, takes a different view of the matter. She lies in wait for me,
to see whether I shall take the liberty referred to, and, if she sees that I do, I can distinctly hear her growl. For days thereafter, when we meet she
refuses to greet me with the customary signs of respect. On the day before the dream the housekeeper's attitude was reinforced by that of the
maid. I had just furnished my usual hurried visit to the patient when the servant confronted me in the ante-room, observing: "You might as well
have wiped your shoes today, doctor, before you came into the room. The red carpet is all dirty again from your feet." This is the only
justification for the appearance of the stairs and the maid in my dream.
Between my leaping upstairs and my spitting on the stairs there is an intimate connection. Pharyngitis and cardiac troubles are both supposed to
be punishments for the vice of smoking, on account of which vice my own housekeeper does not credit me with excessive tidiness, so that my
reputation suffers in both the houses which my dream fuses into one.
I must postpone the further interpretation of this dream until I can indicate the origin of the typical dream of being incompletely clothed. In the
meantime, as a provisional deduction from the dream just related, I note that the dream-sensation of inhibited movement is always aroused at a
point where a certain connection requires it. A peculiar condition of my motor system during sleep cannot be responsible for this dream-content,
since a moment earlier I found myself, as though in confirmation of this fact, skipping lightly up the stairs.
D. Typical Dreams
Generally speaking, we are not in a position to interpret another person's dream if he is unwilling to furnish us with the unconscious thoughts
which lie behind the dream-content, and for this reason the practical applicability of our method of dream- interpretation is often seriously
restricted.[35] But there are dreams which exhibit a complete contrast to the individual's customary liberty to endow his dream-world with a
special individuality, thereby making it inaccessible to an alien understanding: there are a number of dreams which almost every one has dreamed
in the same manner, and of which we are accustomed to assume that they have the same significance in the case of every dreamer. A peculiar
interest attaches to these typical dreams, because, no matter who dreams them, they presumably all derive from the same sources, so that they
would seem to be particularly fitted to provide us with information as to the sources of dreams.
With quite special expectations, therefore, we shall proceed to test our technique of dream-interpretation on these typical dreams, and only with
extreme reluctance shall we admit that precisely in respect of this material our method is not fully verified. In the interpretation of typical dreams
we as a rule fail to obtain those associations from the dreamer which in other cases have led us to comprehension of the dream, or else these
associations are confused and inadequate, so that they do not help us to solve our problem.
Why this is the case, and how we can remedy this defect in our technique, are points which will be discussed in a later chapter. The reader will
then understand why I can deal with only a few of the group of typical dreams in this chapter, and why I have postponed the discussion of the
others.
(a) THE EMBARRASSMENT-DREAM OF NAKEDNESS
In a dream in which one is naked or scantily clad in the presence of strangers, it sometimes happens that one is not in the least ashamed of one's
condition. But the dream of nakedness demands our attention only when shame and embarrassment are felt in it, when one wishes to escape or to
hide, and when one feels the strange inhibition of being unable to stir from the spot, and of being utterly powerless to alter the painful situation. It
is only in this connection that the dream is typical; otherwise the nucleus of its content may be involved in all sorts of other connections, or may
be replaced by individual amplifications. The essential point is that one has a painful feeling of shame, and is anxious to hide one's nakedness,
usually by means of locomotion, but is absolutely unable to do so. I believe that the great majority of my readers will at some time have found
themselves in this situation in a dream.
The nature and manner of the exposure is usually rather vague. The dreamer will say, perhaps, "I was in my chemise," but this is rarely a clear
image; in most cases the lack of clothing is so indeterminate that it is described in narrating the dream by an alternative: "I was in my chemise or 
my petticoat." As a rule the deficiency in clothing is not serious enough to justify the feeling of shame attached to it. For a man who has served in
the army, nakedness is often replaced by a manner of dressing that is contrary to regulations. "I was in the street without my sabre, and I saw
some officers approaching," or "I had no collar," or "I was wearing checked civilian trousers," etc.
The persons before whom one is ashamed are almost always strangers, whose faces remain indeterminate. It never happens, in the typical dream,
that one is reproved or even noticed on account of the lack of clothing which causes one such embarrassment. On the contrary, the people in the
dream appear to be quite indifferent; or, as I was able to note in one particularly vivid dream, they have stiff and solemn expressions. This gives
us food for thought.
The dreamer's embarrassment and the spectator's indifference constitute a contradition such as often occurs in dreams. It would be more in
keeping with the dreamer's feelings if the strangers were to look at him in astonishment, or were to laugh at him, or be outraged. I think, however,
that this obnoxious feature has been displaced by wish-fulfilment, while the embarrassment is for some reason retained, so that the two
components are not in agreement. We have an interesting proof that the dream which is partially distorted by wish-fulfilment has not been
properly understood; for it has been made the basis of a fairy-tale familiar to us all in Andersen's version of The Emperor's New Clothes, and it
has more recently received poetical treatment by Fulda in The Talisman. In Andersen's fairy-tale we are told of two impostors who weave a costly
garment for the Emperor, which shall, however, be visible only to the good and true. The Emperor goes forth clad to this invisible garment, and
since the imaginary fabric serves as a sort of touchstone, the people are frightened into behaving as though they did not notice the Emperor's
nakedness.
But this is really the situation in our dream. It is not very venturesome to assume that the unintelligible dream-content has provided an incentive
to invent a state of undress which gives meaning to the situation present in the memory. This situation is thereby robbed of its original meaning,
and made to serve alien ends. But we shall see that such a misunderstanding of the dream- content often occurs through the conscious activity of a
second psychic system, and is to be recognized as a factor of the final form of the dream; and further, that in the development of obsessions and
phobias similar misunderstandings- still, of course, within the same psychic personality- play a decisive part. It is even possible to specify whence
the material for the fresh interpretation of the dream is taken. The impostor is the dream, the Emperor is the dreamer himself, and the moralizing
tendency betrays a hazy knowledge of the fact that there is a question, in the latent dream-content, of forbidden wishes, victims of repression. The
connection in which such dreams appear during my analysis of neurotics proves beyond a doubt that a memory of the dreamer's earliest childhood
lies at the foundation of the dream. Only in our childhood was there a time when we were seen by our relatives, as well as by strange nurses,
servants and visitors, in a state of insufficient clothing, and at that time we were not ashamed of our nakedness.[36] In the case of many rather
older children it may be observed that being undressed has an exciting effect upon them, instead of making them feel ashamed. They laugh, leap
about, slap or thump their own bodies; the mother, or whoever is present, scolds them, saying: "Fie, that is shameful- you mustn't do that!"
Children often show a desire to display themselves; it is hardly possible to pass through a village in country districts without meeting a two-or
three-year-old child who lifts up his or her blouse or frock before the traveller, possibly in his honour. One of my patients has retained in his
conscious memory a scene from his eighth year, in which, after undressing for bed, he wanted to dance into his little sister's room in his shirt, but
was prevented by the servant. In the history of the childhood of neurotics, exposure before children of the opposite sex plays a prominent part; in
paranoia, the delusion of being observed while dressing and undressing may be directly traced to these experiences; and among those who have
remained perverse, there is a class in whom the childish impulse is accentuated into a symptom: the class of exhibitionists.
This age of childhood, in which the sense of shame is unknown, seems a paradise when we look back upon it later, and paradise itself is nothing
but the mass-phantasy of the childhood of the individual. This is why in paradise men are naked and unashamed, until the moment arrives when
shame and fear awaken; expulsion follows, and sexual life and cultural development begin. Into this paradise dreams can take us back every
night; we have already ventured the conjecture that the impressions of our earliest childhood (from the prehistoric period until about the end of
the third year) crave reproduction for their own sake, perhaps without further reference to their content, so that their repetition is a wishfulfilment. Dreams of nakedness, then, are exhibition-dreams.[37]
The nucleus of an exhibition-dream is furnished by one's own person, which is seen not as that of a child, but as it exists in the present, and by the
idea of scanty clothing which emerges indistinctly, owing to the superimposition of so many later situations of being partially clothed, or out of
consideration for the censorship; to these elements are added the persons in whose presence one is ashamed. I know of no example in which the
actual spectators of these infantile exhibitions reappear in a dream; for a dream is hardly ever a simple recollection. Strangely enough, those
persons who are the objects of our sexual interest in childhood are omitted from all reproductions, in dreams, in hysteria or in obsessional
neurosis; paranoia alone restores the spectators, and is fanatically convinced of their presence, although they remain unseen. The substitute for
these persons offered by the dream, the number of strangers who take no notice of the spectacle offered them, is precisely the counter- wish to
that single intimately-known person for whom the exposure was intended. "A number of strangers," moreover, often occur in dreams in all sorts
of other connections; as a counter-wish they always signify a secret.[38] It will be seen that even that restitution of the old state of affairs that
occurs in paranoia complies with this counter-tendency. One is no longer alone; one is quite positively being watched; but the spectators are a
number of strange, curiously indeterminate people.
Furthermore, repression finds a place in the exhibition-dream. For the disagreeable sensation of the dream is, of course, the reaction on the part of
the second psychic instance to the fact that the exhibitionistic scene which has been condemned by the censorship has nevertheless succeeded in
presenting itself. The only way to avoid this sensation would be to refrain from reviving the scene. 
In a later chapter we shall deal once again with the feeling of inhibition. In our dreams it represents to perfection a conflict of the will, a denial.
According to our unconscious purpose, the exhibition is to proceed; according to the demands of the censorship, it is to come to an end.
The relation of our typical dreams to fairy-tales and other fiction and poetry is neither sporadic nor accidental. Sometimes the penetrating insight
of the poet has analytically recognized the process of transformation of which the poet is otherwise the instrument, and has followed it up in the
reverse direction; that is to say, has traced a poem to a dream. A friend has called my attention to the following passage in G. Keller's Der Grune
Heinrich: "I do not wish, dear Lee, that you should ever come to realize from experience the exquisite and piquant truth in the situation of
Odysseus, when he appears, naked and covered with mud, before Nausicaa and her playmates! Would you like to know what it means? Let us for
a moment consider the incident closely. If you are ever parted from your home, and from all that is dear to you, and wander about in a strange
country; if you have seen much and experienced much; if you have cares and sorrows, and are, perhaps, utterly wretched and forlorn, you will
some night inevitably dream that you are approaching your home; you will see it shining and glittering in the loveliest colours; lovely and
gracious figures will come to meet you; and then you will suddenly discover that you are ragged, naked, and covered with dust. An indescribable
feeling of shame and fear overcomes you; you try to cover yourself, to hide, and you wake up bathed in sweat. As long as humanity exists, this
will be the dream of the care-laden, tempest-tossed man, and thus Homer has drawn this situation from the profoundest depths of the eternal
nature of humanity."
What are the profoundest depths of the eternal nature of humanity, which the poet commonly hopes to awaken in his listeners, but these stirrings
of the psychic life which are rooted in that age of childhood, which subsequently becomes prehistoric? Childish wishes, now suppressed and
forbidden, break into the dream behind the unobjectionable and permissibly conscious wishes of the homeless man, and it is for this reason that
the dream which is objectified in the legend of Nausicaa regularly develops into an anxiety-dream.
My own dream of hurrying upstairs, which presently changed into being glued to the stairs, is likewise an exhibition-dream, for it reveals the
essential ingredients of such a dream. It must therefore be possible to trace it back to experiences in my childhood, and the knowledge of these
should enable us to conclude how far the servant's behaviour to me (i.e., her reproach that I had soiled the carpet) helped her to secure the position which she occupies in the dream. Now I am actually able to furnish the desired explanation. One learns in a psycho- analysis to interpret temporal
proximity by material connection; two ideas which are apparently without connection, but which occur in immediate succession, belong to a unity
which has to be deciphered; just as an a and a b, when written in succession, must be pronounced as one syllable, ab. It is just the same with the
interrelations of dreams. The dream of the stairs has been taken from a series of dreams with whose other members I am familiar, having
interpreted them. A dream included in this series must belong to the same context. Now, the other dreams of the series are based on the memory
of a nurse to whom I was entrusted for a season, from the time when I was still at the breast to the age of two and a half, and of whom a hazy
recollection has remained in my consciousness. According to information which I recently obtained from my mother, she was old and ugly, but
very intelligent and thorough; according to the inferences which I am justified in drawing from my dreams, she did not always treat me quite
kindly, but spoke harshly to me when I showed insufficient understanding of the necessity for cleanliness. Inasmuch as the maid endeavoured to
continue my education in this respect, she is entitled to be treated, in my dream, as an incarnation of the prehistoric old woman. It is to be
assumed, of course, that the child was fond of his teacher in spite of her harsh behaviour.[39]

Another series of dreams which may be called typical are those whose content is that a beloved relative, a parent, brother, sister, child, or the like,
has died. We must at once distinguish two classes of such dreams: those in which the dreamer remains unmoved, and those in which he feels
profoundly grieved by the death of the beloved person, even expressing this grief by shedding tears in his sleep.
We may ignore the dreams of the first group; they have no claim to be reckoned as typical. If they are analysed, it is found that they signify
something that is not contained in them, that they are intended to mask another wish of some kind. This is the case in the dream of the aunt who
sees the only son of her sister lying on a bier (chapter IV). The dream does not mean that she desires the death of her little nephew; as we have
learned, it merely conceals the wish to see a certain beloved person again after a long separation- the same person whom she had seen after as
long an interval at the funeral of another nephew. This wish, which is the real content of the dream, gives no cause for sorrow, and for that reason
no sorrow is felt in the dream. We see here that the feeling contained in the dream does not belong to the manifest, but to the latent dreamcontent, and that the affective content has remained free from the distortion which has befallen the conceptual content.
It is otherwise with those dreams in which the death of a beloved relative is imagined, and in which a painful affect is felt. These signify, as their
content tells us, the wish that the person in question might die; and since I may here expect that the feelings of all my readers and of all who have
had such dreams will lead them to reject my explanation, I must endeavour to rest my proof on the broadest possible basis.
We have already cited a dream from which we could see that the wishes represented as fulfilled in dreams are not always current wishes. They
may also be bygone, discarded, buried and repressed wishes, which we must nevertheless credit with a sort of continued existence, merely on
account of their reappearance in a dream. They are not dead, like persons who have died, in the sense that we know death, but are rather like the
shades in the Odyssey which awaken to a certain degree of life so soon as they have drunk blood. The dream of the dead child in the box (chapter 
IV) contained a wish that had been present fifteen years earlier, and which had at that time been frankly admitted as real. Further- and this,
perhaps, is not unimportant from the standpoint of the theory of dreams- a recollection from the dreamer's earliest childhood was at the root of
this wish also. When the dreamer was a little child- but exactly when cannot be definitely determined- she heard that her mother, during the
pregnancy of which she was the outcome, had fallen into a profound emotional depression, and had passionately wished for the death of the child
in her womb. Having herself grown up and become pregnant, she was only following the example of her mother.
If anyone dreams that his father or mother, his brother or sister, has died, and his dream expresses grief, I should never adduce this as proof that
he wishes any of them dead now. The theory of dreams does not go as far as to require this; it is satisfied with concluding that the dreamer has
wished them dead at some time or other during his childhood. I fear, however, that this limitation will not go far to appease my critics; probably
they will just as energetically deny the possibility that they ever had such thoughts, as they protest that they do not harbour them now. I must,
therefore, reconstruct a portion of the submerged infantile psychology on the basis of the evidence of the present.[40]
Let us first of all consider the relation of children to their brothers and sisters. I do not know why we presuppose that it must be a loving one,
since examples of enmity among adult brothers and sisters are frequent in everyone's experience, and since we are so often able to verify the fact
that this estrangement originated during childhood, or has always existed. Moreover, many adults who today are devoted to their brothers and
sisters, and support them in adversity, lived with them in almost continuous enmity during their childhood. The elder child ill- treated the
younger, slandered him, and robbed him of his toys; the younger was consumed with helpless fury against the elder, envied and feared him, or his
earliest impulse toward liberty and his first revolt against injustice were directed against his oppressor. The parents say that the children do not
agree, and cannot find the reason for it. It is not difficult to see that the character even of a well-behaved child is not the character we should wish
to find in an adult. A child is absolutely egoistical; he feels his wants acutely, and strives remorselessly to satisfy them, especially against his
competitors, other children, and first of all against his brothers and sisters. And yet we do not on that account call a child wicked- we call him
naughty; he is not responsible for his misdeeds, either in our own judgment or in the eyes of the law. And this is as it should be; for we may
expect that within the very period of life which we reckon as childhood, altruistic impulses and morality will awake in the little egoist, and that, in
the words of Meynert, a secondary ego will overlay and inhibit the primary ego. Morality, of course, does not develop simultaneously in all its
departments, and furthermore, the duration of the amoral period of childhood differs in different individuals. Where this morality fails to develop
we are prone to speak of degeneration; but here the case is obviously one of arrested development. Where the primary character is already
overlaid by the later development it may be at least partially uncovered again by an attack of hysteria. The correspondence between the so-called
hysterical character and that of a naughty child is positively striking. The obsessional neurosis, on the other hand, corresponds to a supermorality, which develops as a strong reinforcement against the primary character that is threatening to revive.
Many persons, then, who now love their brothers and sisters, and who would feel bereaved by their death, harbour in their unconscious hostile
wishes, survivals from an earlier period, wishes which are able to realize themselves in dreams. It is, however, quite especially interesting to
observe the behaviour of little children up to their third and fourth year towards their younger brothers or sisters. So far the child has been the
only one; now he is informed that the stork has brought a new baby. The child inspects the new arrival, and expresses his opinion with decision:
"The stork had better take it back again!"[41]
I seriously declare it as my opinion that a child is able to estimate the disadvantages which he has to expect on account of a new-comer. A
connection of mine, who now gets on very well with a sister, who is four years her junior, responded to the news of this sister's arrival with the
reservation: "But I shan't give her my red cap, anyhow." If the child should come to realize only at a later stage that its happiness may be
prejudiced by a younger brother or sister, its enmity will be aroused at this period. I know of a case where a girl, not three years of age, tried to
strangle an infant in its cradle, because she suspected that its continued presence boded her no good. Children at this time of life are capable of a
jealousy that is perfectly evident and extremely intense. Again, perhaps the little brother or sister really soon disappears, and the child once more
draws to himself the whole affection of the household; then a new child is sent by the stork; is it not natural that the favourite should conceive the
wish that the new rival may meet the same fate as the earlier one, in order that he may be as happy as he was before the birth of the first child, and
during the interval after his death?[42] Of course, this attitude of the child towards the younger brother or sister is, under normal circumstances, a
mere function of the difference of age. After a certain interval the maternal instincts of the older girl will be awakened towards the helpless newborn infant.
Feelings of hostility towards brothers and sisters must occur far more frequently in children than is observed by their obtuse elders.[43]
In the case of my own children, who followed one another rapidly, I missed the opportunity of making such observations, I am now retrieving it,
thanks to my little nephew, whose undisputed domination was disturbed after fifteen months by the arrival of a feminine rival. I hear, it is true,
that the young man behaves very chivalrously toward his little sister, that he kisses her hand and strokes her; but in spite of this I have convinced
myself that even before the completion of his second year he is using his new command of language to criticize this person, who, to him, after all,
seems superfluous. Whenever the conversation turns upon her he chimes in, and cries angrily: "Too (l)ittle, too (l)ittle!" During the last few
months, since the child has outgrown this disparagement, owing to her splendid development, he has found another reason for his insistence that
she does not deserve so much attention. He reminds us, on every suitable pretext: "She hasn't any teeth."[44] We all of us recollect the case of the
eldest daughter of another sister of mine. The child, who was then six years of age, spent a full half-hour in going from one aunt to another with
the question: "Lucie can't understand that yet, can she?" Lucie was her rival- two and a half years younger. 
I have never failed to come across this dream of the death of brothers or sisters, denoting an intense hostility, e.g., I have met it in all my female
patients. I have met with only one exception, which could easily be interpreted into a confirmation of the rule. Once, in the course of a sitting,
when I was explaining this state of affairs to a female patient, since it seemed to have some bearing on the symptoms under consideration that
day, she answered, to my astonishment, that she had never had such dreams. But another dream occurred to her, which presumably had nothing to
do with the case- a dream which she had first dreamed at the age of four, when she was the youngest child, and had since then dreamed
repeatedly. "A number of children, all her brothers and sisters with her boy and girl cousins, were romping about in a meadow. Suddenly they all
grew wings, flew up, and were gone." She had no idea of the significance of this dream; but we can hardly fail to recognize it as a dream of the
death of all the brothers and sisters, in its original form, and but little influenced by the censorship. I will venture to add the following analysis of
it: on the death of one out of this large number of children- in this case the children of two brothers were brought up together as brothers and
sisters- would not our dreamer, at that time not yet four years of age, have asked some wise, grown-up person: "What becomes of children when
they are dead?" The answer would probably have been: "They grow wings and become angels." After this explanation. all the brothers and sisters
and cousins in the dream now have wings, like angels and- this is the important point- they fly away. Our little angel-maker is left alone: just
think, the only one out of such a crowd! That the children romp about a meadow, from which they fly away, points almost certainly to butterfliesit is as though the child had been influenced by the same association of ideas which led the ancients to imagine Psyche, the soul, with the wings
of a butterfly.
Perhaps some readers will now object that the inimical impulses of children toward their brothers and sisters may perhaps be admitted, but how
does the childish character arrive at such heights of wickedness as to desire the death of a rival or a stronger playmate, as though all misdeeds
could be atoned for only by death? Those who speak in this fashion forget that the child's idea of being dead has little but the word in common
with our own. The child knows nothing of the horrors of decay, of shivering in the cold grave, of the terror of the infinite Nothing, the thought of
which the adult, as all the myths of the hereafter testify, finds so intolerable. The fear of death is alien to the child; and so he plays with the horrid
word, and threatens another child: "If you do that again, you will die, just like Francis died"; at which the poor mother shudders, unable perhaps
to forget that the greater proportion of mortals do not survive beyond the years of childhood. Even at the age of eight, a child returning from a
visit to a natural history museum may say to her mother: "Mamma, I do love you so; if you ever die, I am going to have you stuffed and set you
up here in the room, so that I can always, always see you!" So different from our own is the childish conception of being dead.[45]
Being dead means, for the child, who has been spared the sight of the suffering that precedes death, much the same as being gone, and ceasing to
annoy the survivors. The child does not distinguish the means by which this absence is brought about, whether by distance, or estrangement, or
death.[46] If, during the child's prehistoric years, a nurse has been dismissed, and if his mother dies a little while later, the two experiences, as we
discover by analysis, form links of a chain in his memory. The fact that the child does not very intensely miss those who are absent has been
realized, to her sorrow, by many a mother, when she has returned home from an absence of several weeks, and has been told, upon inquiry: "The
children have not asked for their mother once." But if she really departs to "that undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveller returns,"
the children seem at first to have forgotten her, and only subsequently do they begin to remember their dead mother.
While, therefore, the child has its motives for desiring the absence of another child, it is lacking in all those restraints which would prevent it from
clothing this wish in the form of a death-wish; and the psychic reaction to dreams of a death-wish proves that, in spite of all the differences of
content, the wish in the case of the child is after all identical with the corresponding wish in an adult.
If, then, the death-wish of a child in respect of his brothers and sisters is explained by his childish egoism, which makes him regard his brothers
and sisters as rivals, how are we to account for the same wish in respect of his parents, who bestow their love on him, and satisfy his needs, and
whose preservation he ought to desire for these very egoistical reasons?
Towards a solution of this difficulty we may be guided by our knowledge that the very great majority of dreams of the death of a parent refer to
the parent of the same sex as the dreamer, so that a man generally dreams of the death of his father, and a woman of the death of her mother. I do
not claim that this happens constantly; but that it happens in a great majority of cases is so evident that it requires explanation by some factor of
general significance.[47] Broadly speaking, it is as though a sexual preference made itself felt at an early age, as though the boy regarded his
father, and the girl her mother, as a rival in love- by whose removal he or she could but profit.
Before rejecting this idea as monstrous, let the reader again consider the actual relations between parents and children. We must distinguish
between the traditional standard of conduct, the filial piety expected in this relation, and what daily observation shows us to be the fact. More than
one occasion for enmity lies hidden amidst the relations of parents and children; conditions are present in the greatest abundance under which
wishes which cannot pass the censorship are bound to arise. Let us first consider the relation between father and son. In my opinion the sanctity
with which we have endorsed the injunctions of the Decalogue dulls our perception of the reality. Perhaps we hardly dare permit ourselves to
perceive that the greater part of humanity neglects to obey the fifth commandment. In the lowest as well as in the highest strata of human society,
filial piety towards parents is wont to recede before other interests. The obscure legends which have been handed down to us from the primeval
ages of human society in mythology and folklore give a deplorable idea of the despotic power of the father, and the ruthlessness with which it was
exercised. Kronos devours his children, as the wild boar devours the litter of the sow; Zeus emasculates his father[48] and takes his place as ruler.
The more tyrannically the father ruled in the ancient family, the more surely must the son, as his appointed successor, have assumed the position
of an enemy, and the greater must have been his impatience to attain to supremacy through the death of his father. Even in our own middle-class 
families the father commonly fosters the growth of the germ of hatred which is naturally inherent in the paternal relation, by refusing to allow the
son to be a free agent or by denying him the means of becoming so. A physician often has occasion to remark that a son's grief at the loss of his
father cannot quench his gratification that he has at last obtained his freedom. Fathers, as a rule, cling desperately to as much of the sadly
antiquated potestas patris familias[49] as still survives in our modern society, and the poet who, like Ibsen, puts the immemorial strife between
father and son in the foreground of his drama is sure of his effect. The causes of conflict between mother and daughter arise when the daughter
grows up and finds herself watched by her mother when she longs for real sexual freedom, while the mother is reminded by the budding beauty of
her daughter that for her the time has come to renounce sexual claims.
All these circumstances are obvious to everyone, but they do not help us to explain dreams of the death of their parents in persons for whom filial
piety has long since come to be unquestionable. We are, however, prepared by the foregoing discussion to look for the origin of a death-wish in
the earliest years of childhood.
In the case of psychoneurotics, analysis confirms this conjecture beyond all doubt. For analysis tells us that the sexual wishes of the child- in so
far as they deserve this designation in their nascent state- awaken at a very early age, and that the earliest affection of the girl-child is lavished on
the father, while the earliest infantile desires of the boy are directed upon the mother. For the boy the father, and for the girl the mother, becomes
an obnoxious rival, and we have already shown, in the case of brothers and sisters, how readily in children this feeling leads to the death-wish. As
a general rule, sexual selection soon makes its appearance in the parents; it is a natural tendency for the father to spoil his little daughters, and for
the mother to take the part of the sons, while both, so long as the glamour of sex does not prejudice their judgment, are strict in training the
children. The child is perfectly conscious of this partiality, and offers resistance to the parent who opposes it. To find love in an adult is for the
child not merely the satisfaction of a special need; it means also that the child's will is indulged in all other respects. Thus the child is obeying its
own sexual instinct, and at the same time reinforcing the stimulus proceeding from the parents, when its choice between the parents corresponds
with their own.
The signs of these infantile tendencies are for the most part over-looked; and yet some of them may be observed even after the early years of
childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my acquaintance, whenever her mother is called away from the table, takes advantage of her absence to
proclaim herself her successor. "Now I shall be Mamma; Karl, do you want some more vegetables? Have some more, do," etc. A particularly
clever and lively little girl, not yet four years of age, in whom this trait of child psychology is unusually transparent, says frankly: "Now mummy
can go away; then daddy must marry me, and I will be his wife." Nor does this wish by any means exclude the possibility that the child may most
tenderly love its mother. If the little boy is allowed to sleep at his mother's side whenever his father goes on a journey, and if after his father's
return he has to go back to the nursery, to a person whom he likes far less, the wish may readily arise that his father might always be absent, so
that he might keep his place beside his dear, beautiful mamma; and the father's death is obviously a means for the attainment of this wish; for the
child's experience has taught him that dead folks, like grandpapa, for example, are always absent; they never come back.
While such observations of young children readily accommodate themselves to the interpretation suggested, they do not, it is true, carry the
complete conviction which is forced upon a physician by the psycho-analysis of adult neurotics. The dreams of neurotic patients are
communicated with preliminaries of such a nature that their interpretation as wish-dreams becomes inevitable. One day I find a lady depressed
and weeping. She says: "I do not want to see my relatives any more; they must shudder at me." Thereupon, almost without any transition, she tells
me that she has remembered a dream, whose significance, of course, she does not understand. She dreamed it when she was four years old, and it
was this: A fox or a lynx is walking about the roof; then something falls down, or she falls down, and after that, her mother is carried out of the
house- dead; whereat the dreamer weeps bitterly. I have no sooner informed her that this dream must signify a childish wish to see her mother
dead, and that it is because of this dream that she thinks that her relatives must shudder at her, than she furnishes material in explanation of the
dream. "Lynx-eye" is an opprobrious epithet which a street boy once bestowed on her when she was a very small child; and when she was three
years old a brick or tile fell on her mother's head, so that she bled profusely.
I once had occasion to make a thorough study of a young girl who was passing through various psychic states. In the state of frenzied confusion
with which her illness began, the patient manifested a quite peculiar aversion for her mother; she struck her and abused her whenever she
approached the bed, while at the same period she was affectionate and submissive to a much older sister. Then there followed a lucid but rather
apathetic condition, with badly disturbed sleep. It was in this phase that I began to treat her and to analyse her dreams. An enormous number of
these dealt, in a more or less veiled fashion, with the death of the girl's mother; now she was present at the funeral of an old woman, now she saw
herself and her sister sitting at a table, dressed in mourning; the meaning of the dreams could not be doubted. During her progressive
improvement hysterical phobias made their appearance, the most distressing of which was the fear that something had happened to her mother.
Wherever she might be at the time, she had then to hurry home in order to convince herself that her mother was still alive. Now this case,
considered in conjunction with the rest of my experience. was very instructive; it showed, in polyglot translations, as it were, the different ways in
which the psychic apparatus reacts to the same exciting idea. In the state of confusion, which I regard as an overthrow of the second psychic
instance by the first instance, at other times suppressed, the unconscious enmity towards the mother gained the upper hand, and found physical
expression; then, when the patient became calmer, the insurrection was suppressed, and the domination of the censorship restored, and this enmity
had access only to the realms of dreams, in which it realized the wish that the mother might die; and, after the normal condition had been still
further strengthened, it created the excessive concern for the mother as a hysterical counter-reaction and defensive phenomenon. In the light of
these considerations, it is no longer inexplicable why hysterical girls are so often extravagantly attached to their mothers. 
On another occasion I had an opportunity of obtaining a profound insight into the unconscious psychic life of a young man for whom an
obsessional neurosis made life almost unendurable, so that he could not go into the streets, because he was tormented by the fear that he would
kill everyone he met. He spent his days in contriving evidence of an alibi in case he should be accused of any murder that might have been
committed in the city. It goes without saying that this man was as moral as he was highly cultured. The analysis- which, by the way, led to a curerevealed, as the basis of this distressing obsession, murderous impulses in respect of his rather overstrict father- impulses which, to his
astonishment, had consciously expressed themselves when he was seven years old, but which, of course, had originated in a much earlier period
of his childhood. After the painful illness and death of his father, when the young man was in his thirty-first year, the obsessive reproach made its
appearance, which transferred itself to strangers in the form of this phobia. Anyone capable of wishing to push his own father from a mountaintop into an abyss cannot be trusted to spare the lives of persons less closely related to him; he therefore does well to lock himself into his room.
According to my already extensive experience, parents play a leading part in the infantile psychology of all persons who subsequently become
psychoneurotics. Falling in love with one parent and hating the other forms part of the permanent stock of the psychic impulses which arise in
early childhood, and are of such importance as the material of the subsequent neurosis. But I do not believe that psychoneurotics are to be sharply
distinguished in this respect from other persons who remain normal- that is, I do not believe that they are capable of creating something
absolutely new and peculiar to themselves. It is far more probable- and this is confirmed by incidental observations of normal children- that in
their amorous or hostile attitude toward their parents, psychoneurotics do no more than reveal to us, by magnification, something that occurs less
markedly and intensively in the minds of the majority of children. Antiquity has furnished us with legendary matter which corroborates this
belief, and the profound and universal validity of the old legends is explicable only by an equally universal validity of the above-mentioned
hypothesis of infantile psychology.
I am referring to the legend of King Oedipus and the Oedipus Rex of Sophocles. Oedipus, the son of Laius, king of Thebes, and Jocasta, is
exposed as a suckling, because an oracle had informed the father that his son, who was still unborn, would be his murderer. He is rescued, and
grows up as a king's son at a foreign court, until, being uncertain of his origin, he, too, consults the oracle, and is warned to avoid his native place,
for he is destined to become the murderer of his father and the husband of his mother. On the road leading away from his supposed home he
meets King Laius, and in a sudden quarrel strikes him dead. He comes to Thebes, where he solves the riddle of the Sphinx, who is barring the
way to the city, whereupon he is elected king by the grateful Thebans, and is rewarded with the hand of Jocasta. He reigns for many years in
peace and honour, and begets two sons and two daughters upon his unknown mother, until at last a plague breaks out- which causes the Thebians
to consult the oracle anew. Here Sophocles' tragedy begins. The messengers bring the reply that the plague will stop as soon as the murderer of
Laius is driven from the country. But where is he?
Where shall be found,
Faint, and hard to be known, the trace of the ancient guilt?
The action of the play consists simply in the disclosure, approached step by step and artistically delayed (and comparable to the work of a psychoanalysis) that Oedipus himself is the murderer of Laius, and that he is the son of the murdered man and Jocasta. Shocked by the abominable crime
which he has unwittingly committed, Oedipus blinds himself, and departs from his native city. The prophecy of the oracle has been fulfilled.
The Oedipus Rex is a tragedy of fate; its tragic effect depends on the conflict between the all-powerful will of the gods and the vain efforts of
human beings threatened with disaster; resignation to the divine will, and the perception of one's own impotence is the lesson which the deeply
moved spectator is supposed to learn from the tragedy. Modern authors have therefore sought to achieve a similar tragic effect by expressing the
same conflict in stories of their own invention. But the playgoers have looked on unmoved at the unavailing efforts of guiltless men to avert the
fulfilment of curse or oracle; the modern tragedies of destiny have failed of their effect.
If the Oedipus Rex is capable of moving a modern reader or playgoer no less powerfully than it moved the contemporary Greeks, the only
possible explanation is that the effect of the Greek tragedy does not depend upon the conflict between fate and human will, but upon the peculiar
nature of the material by which this conflict is revealed. There must be a voice within us which is prepared to acknowledge the compelling power
of fate in the Oedipus, while we are able to condemn the situations occurring in Die Ahnfrau or other tragedies of fate as arbitrary inventions. And
there actually is a motive in the story of King Oedipus which explains the verdict of this inner voice. His fate moves us only because it might
have been our own, because the oracle laid upon us before our birth the very curse which rested upon him. It may be that we were all destined to
direct our first sexual impulses toward our mothers, and our first impulses of hatred and violence toward our fathers; our dreams convince us that
we were. King Oedipus, who slew his father Laius and wedded his mother Jocasta, is nothing more or less than a wish-fulfilment- the fulfilment
of the wish of our childhood. But we, more fortunate than he, in so far as we have not become psychoneurotics, have since our childhood
succeeded in withdrawing our sexual impulses from our mothers, and in forgetting our jealousy of our fathers. We recoil from the person for
whom this primitive wish of our childhood has been fulfilled with all the force of the repression which these wishes have undergone in our minds
since childhood. As the poet brings the guilt of Oedipus to light by his investigation, he forces us to become aware of our own inner selves, in
which the same impulses are still extant, even though they are suppressed. The antithesis with which the chorus departs:
...Behold, this is Oedipus,
Who unravelled the great riddle, and was first in power,
Whose fortune all the townsmen praised and envied;
See in what dread adversity he sank!
-this admonition touches us and our own pride, we who, since the years of our childhood, have grown so wise and so powerful in our own
estimation. Like Oedipus, we live in ignorance of the desires that offend morality, the desires that nature has forced upon us and after their
unveiling we may well prefer to avert our gaze from the scenes of our childhood.[50]
In the very text of Sophocles' tragedy there is an unmistakable reference to the fact that the Oedipus legend had its source in dream-material of
immemorial antiquity, the content of which was the painful disturbance of the child's relations to its parents caused by the first impulses of
sexuality. Jocasta comforts Oedipus- who is not yet enlightened, but is troubled by the recollection of the oracle- by an allusion to a dream which
is often dreamed, though it cannot, in her opinion, mean anything: -
For many a man hath seen himself in dreams His mother's mate, but he who gives no heed To suchlike matters bears the easier life. -
The dream of having sexual intercourse with one's mother was as common then as it is today with many people, who tell it with indignation and
astonishment. As may well be imagined, it is the key to the tragedy and the complement to the dream of the death of the father. The Oedipus fable
is the reaction of phantasy to these two typical dreams, and just as such a dream, when occurring to an adult, is experienced with feelings of
aversion, so the content of the fable must include terror and self- chastisement. The form which it subsequently assumed was the result of an
uncomprehending secondary elaboration of the material, which sought to make it serve a theological intention.[51] The attempt to reconcile
divine omnipotence with human responsibility must, of course, fail with this material as with any other.
Another of the great poetic tragedies, Shakespeare's Hamlet, is rooted in the same soil as Oedipus Rex. But the whole difference in the psychic
life of the two widely separated periods of civilization, and the progress, during the course of time, of repression in the emotional life of
humanity, is manifested in the differing treatment of the same material. In Oedipus Rex the basic wish-phantasy of the child is brought to light
and realized as it is in dreams; in Hamlet it remains repressed, and we learn of its existence- as we discover the relevant facts in a neurosis- only
through the inhibitory effects which proceed from it. In the more modern drama, the curious fact that it is possible to remain in complete
uncertainty as to the character of the hero has proved to be quite consistent with the over-powering effect of the tragedy. The play is based upon
Hamlet's hesitation in accomplishing the task of revenge assigned to him; the text does not give the cause or the motive of this hesitation, nor
have the manifold attempts at interpretation succeeded in doing so. According to the still prevailing conception, a conception for which Goethe
was first responsible. Hamlet represents the type of man whose active energy is paralyzed by excessive intellectual activity: "Sicklied o'er with
the pale cast of thought." According to another conception. the poet has endeavoured to portray a morbid, irresolute character, on the verge of
neurasthenia. The plot of the drama, however, shows us that Hamlet is by no means intended to appear as a character wholly incapable of action.
On two separate occasions we see him assert himself: once in a sudden outburst of rage, when he stabs the eavesdropper behind the arras, and on
the other occasion when he deliberately, and even craftily, with the complete unscrupulousness of a prince of the Renaissance, sends the two
courtiers to the death which was intended for himself. What is it, then, that inhibits him in accomplishing the task which his father's ghost has laid
upon him? Here the explanation offers itself that it is the peculiar nature of this task. Hamlet is able to do anything but take vengeance upon the
man who did away with his father and has taken his father's place with his mother- the man who shows him in realization the repressed desires of
his own childhood. The loathing which should have driven him to revenge is thus replaced by self-reproach, by conscientious scruples, which tell
him that he himself is no better than the murderer whom he is required to punish. I have here translated into consciousness what had to remain
unconscious in the mind of the hero; if anyone wishes to call Hamlet an hysterical subject I cannot but admit that this is the deduction to be drawn
from my interpretation. The sexual aversion which Hamlet expresses in conversation with Ophelia is perfectly consistent with this deduction- the
same sexual aversion which during the next few years was increasingly to take possession of the poet's soul, until it found its supreme utterance in
Timon of Athens. It can, of course, be only the poet's own psychology with which we are confronted in Hamlet; and in a work on Shakespeare by
Georg Brandes (1896) I find the statement that the drama was composed immediately after the death of Shakespeare's father (1601)- that is to say,
when he was still mourning his loss, and during a revival, as we may fairly assume, of his own childish feelings in respect of his father. It is
known, too, that Shakespeare's son, who died in childhood, bore the name of Hamnet (identical with Hamlet). Just as Hamlet treats of the relation
of the son to his parents, so Macbeth, which was written about the same period, is based upon the theme of childlessness. Just as all neurotic
symptoms, like dreams themselves, are capable of hyper-interpretation, and even require such hyper-interpretation before they become perfectly
intelligible, so every genuine poetical creation must have proceeded from more than one motive, more than one impulse in the mind of the poet,
and must admit of more than one interpretation. I have here attempted to interpret only the deepest stratum of impulses in the mind of the creative
poet.[52]
With regard to typical dreams of the death of relatives, I must add a few words upon their significance from the point of view of the theory of
dreams in general. These dreams show us the occurrence of a very unusual state of things; they show us that the dream-thought created by the
repressed wish completely escapes the censorship, and is transferred to the dream without alteration. Special conditions must obtain in order to
make this possible. The following two factors favour the production of these dreams: first, this is the last wish that we could credit ourselves with
harbouring; we believe such a wish "would never occur to us even in a dream"; the dream-censorship is therefore unprepared for this monstrosity,
just as the laws of Solon did not foresee the necessity of establishing a penalty for patricide. Secondly, the repressed and unsuspected wish is, in
this special case, frequently met half-way by a residue from the day's experience, in the form of some concern for the life of the beloved person.
This anxiety cannot enter into the dream otherwise than by taking advantage of the corresponding wish; but the wish is able to mask itself behind 
the concern which has been aroused during the day. If one is inclined to think that all this is really a very much simpler process, and to imagine
that one merely continues during the night, and in one's dream, what was begun during the day, one removes the dreams of the death of those dear
to us out of all connection with the general explanation of dreams, and a problem that may very well be solved remains a problem needlessly.
It is instructive to trace the relation of these dreams to anxiety-dreams. In dreams of the death of those dear to us the repressed wish has found a
way of avoiding the censorship- and the distortion for which the censorship is responsible. An invariable concomitant phenomenon then, is that
painful emotions are felt in the dream. Similarly, an anxiety-dream occurs only when the censorship is entirely or partially overpowered, and on
the other hand, the overpowering of the censorship is facilitated when the actual sensation of anxiety is already present from somatic sources. It
thus becomes obvious for what purpose the censorship performs its office and practises dream-distortion; it does so in order to prevent the
development of anxiety or other forms of painful affect.
I have spoken in the foregoing sections of the egoism of the child's psyche, and I now emphasize this peculiarity in order to suggest a connection,
for dreams too have retained this characteristic. All dreams are absolutely egoistical; in every dream the beloved ego appears, even though in a
disguised form. The wishes that are realized in dreams are invariably the wishes of this ego; it is only a deceptive appearance if interest in another
person is believed to have evoked a dream. I will now analyse a few examples which appear to contradict this assertion. -
I.
A boy not yet four years of age relates the following dream: He saw a large garnished dish, on which was a large joint of roast meat; and the joint
was suddenly- not carved- but eaten up. He did not see the person who ate it.[53]
Who can he be, this strange person, of whose luxurious repast the little fellow dreams? The experience of the day must supply the answer. For
some days past the boy, in accordance with the doctor's orders, had been living on a milk diet; but on the evening of the dream-day he had been
naughty, and, as a punishment, had been deprived of his supper. He had already undergone one such hunger-cure, and had borne his deprivation
bravely. He knew that he would get nothing, but he did not even allude to the fact that he was hungry. Training was beginning to produce its
effect; this is demonstrated even by the dream, which reveals the beginnings of dream-distortion. There is no doubt that he himself is the person
whose desires are directed toward this abundant meal, and a meal of roast meat at that. But since he knows that this is forbidden him, he does not
dare, as hungry children do in dreams (cf. my little Anna's dream about strawberries, chapter III), to sit down to the meal himself. The person
remains anonymous.
II.
One night I dream that I see on a bookseller's counter a new volume of one of those collectors' series, which I am in the habit of buying
(monographs on artistic subjects, history, famous artistic centres, etc.). The new collection is entitled "Famous Orators" (or Orations), and the first
number bears the name of Dr. Lecher.
On analysis it seems to me improbable that the fame of Dr. Lecher, the long-winded speaker of the German Opposition, should occupy my
thoughts while I am dreaming. The fact is that a few days ago I undertook the psychological treatment of some new patients, and am now forced
to talk for ten to twelve hours a day. Thus I myself am a long-winded speaker.
III.
On another occasion I dream that a university lecturer of my acquaintance says to me: "My son, the myopic." Then follows a dialogue of brief
observations and replies. A third portion of the dream follows, in which I and my sons appear, and so far as the latent dream-content is concerned,
the father, the son, and Professor M, are merely lay figures, representing myself and my eldest son. Later on I shall examine this dream again, on
account of another peculiarity.
IV.
The following dream gives an example of really base, egoistical feelings, which conceal themselves behind an affectionate concern:
My friend Otto looks ill; his face is brown and his eyes protrude.
Otto is my family physician, to whom I owe a debt greater than I can ever hope to repay, since he has watched for years over the health of my
children, has treated them successfully when they have been ill, and, moreover, has given them presents whenever he could find any excuse for
doing so. He paid us a visit on the day of the dream, and my wife noticed that he looked tired and exhausted. At night I dream of him, and my
dream attributes to him certain of the symptoms of Basedow's disease. If you were to disregard my rules for dream-interpretation you would
understand this dream to mean that I am concerned about the health of my friend, and that this concern is realized in the dream. It would thus
constitute a contradiction not only of the assertion that a dream is a wish-fulfilment, but also of the assertion that it is accessible only to egoistical 
impulses. But will those who thus interpret my dream explain why I should fear that Otto has Basedow's disease, for which diagnosis his
appearance does not afford the slightest justification? My analysis, on the other hand, furnishes the following material, deriving from an incident
which had occurred six years earlier. We were driving- a small party of us, including Professor R- in the dark through the forest of N, which lies
at a distance of some hours from where we were staying in the country. The driver, who was not quite sober, overthrew us and the carriage down
a bank, and it was only by good fortune that we all escaped unhurt. But we were forced to spend the night at the nearest inn, where the news of
our mishap aroused great sympathy. A certain gentleman, who showed unmistakable symptoms of morbus Basedowii- the brownish colour of the
skin of the face and the protruding eyes, but no goitre- placed himself entirely at our disposal, and asked what he could do for us. Professor R
answered in his decisive way, "Nothing, except lend me a nightshirt." Whereupon our generous friend replied: "I am sorry, but I cannot do that,"
and left us.
In continuing the analysis, it occurs to me that Basedow is the name not only of a physician but also of a famous pedagogue. (Now that I am wide
awake, I do not feel quite sure of this fact.) My friend Otto is the person whom I have asked to take charge of the physical education of my
children- especially during the age of puberty (hence the nightshirt) in case anything should happen to me. By seeing Otto in my dream with the
morbid symptoms of our above-mentioned generous helper, I clearly mean to say: "If anything happens to me, he will do just as little for my
children as Baron L did for us, in spite of his amiable offers." The egoistical flavour of this dream should now be obvious enough.[54] -
In justice to this lady with her national pride it may, however, be remarked that the dogma: "the dream is wholly egoistic" must not be
misunderstood. For inasmuch as everything that occurs in preconscious inking may appear in dreams (in the content as well as the latent dreamthoughts) the altruistic feelings may possibly occur. Similarly, affectionate or amorous feelings for another person, if they exist in the
unconscious, may occur in dreams. The truth of the assertion is therefore restricted to the fact that among the unconscious stimuli of dreams one
very often finds egoistical tendencies which seem to have been overcome in the waking state.
But where is the wish-fulfilment to be found in this? Not in the vengeance wreaked on my friend Otto (who seems to be fated to be badly treated
in my dreams), but in the following circumstance: Inasmuch as in my dream I represented Otto as Baron L, I likewise identified myself with
another person, namely, with Professor R; for I have asked something of Otto, just as R asked something of Baron L at the time of the incident I
have described. And this is the point. For Professor R has gone his way independently, outside academic circles, just as I myself have done, and
has only in his later years received the title which he had earned before. Once more, then, I want to be a professor! The very phrase in his later
years is a wish-fulfilment, for it means that I shall live long enough to steer my boys through the age of puberty myself.
Of other typical dreams, in which one flies with a feeling of ease or falls in terror, I know nothing from my own experience, and whatever I have
to say about them I owe to my psychoanalyses. From the information thus obtained one must conclude that these dreams also reproduce
impressions made in childhood- that is, that they refer to the games involving rapid motion which have such an extraordinary attraction for
children. Where is the uncle who has never made a child fly by running with it across the room with outstretched arms, or has never played at
falling with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly pretending to
withdraw his supporting hand? At such moments children shout with joy, and insatiably demand a repetition of the performance, especially if a
little fright and dizziness are involved in the game; in after years they repeat their sensations in dreams. but in dreams they omit the hands that
held them, so that now they are free to float or fall. We know that all small children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see-sawing;
and if they see gymnastic performances at the circus their recollection of such games is refreshed.[55] In some boys a hysterical attack will
consist simply in the reproduction of such performances, which they accomplish with great dexterity. Not infrequently sexual sensations are
excited by these games of movement, which are quite neutral in themselves. [56] To express the matter in a few words: the exciting games of
childhood are repeated in dreams of flying, falling, reeling and the like, but the voluptuous feelings are now transformed into anxiety. But, as
every mother knows, the excited play of children often enough culminates in quarrelling and tears.
I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that it is the state of our dermal sensations during sleep, the sensation of the movements
of the lungs, etc., that evokes dreams of flying and falling. I see that these very sensations have been reproduced from the memory to which the
dream refers- and that they are, therefore, dream-content and not dream-sources.
I do not for a moment deny, however, that I am unable to furnish a full explanation of this series of typical dreams. Precisely here my material
leaves me in the lurch. I must adhere to the general opinion that all the dermal and kinetic sensations of these typical dreams are awakened as
soon as any psychic motive of whatever kind has need of them, and that they are neglected when there is no such need of them. The relation to
infantile experiences seems to be confirmed by the indications which I have obtained from the analyses of psychoneurotics. But I am unable to
say what other meanings might, in the course of the dreamer's life, have become attached to the memory of these sensations- different, perhaps, in
each individual, despite the typical appearance of these dreams- and I should very much like to be in a position to fill this gap with careful
analyses of good examples. To those who wonder why I complain of a lack of material, despite the frequency of these dreams of flying, falling,
tooth-drawing, etc., I must explain that I myself have never experienced any such dreams since I have turned my attention to the subject of dreaminterpretation. The dreams of neurotics which are at my disposal, however, are not all capable of interpretation, and very often it is impossible to
penetrate to the farthest point of their hidden intention; a certain psychic force which participated in the building up of the neurosis, and which
again becomes active during its dissolution, opposes interpretation of the final problem. 


Everyone who has received his certificate of matriculation after passing his final examination at school complains of the persistence with which
he is plagued by anxiety-dreams in which he has failed, or must go through his course again, etc. For the holder of a university degree this typical
dream is replaced by another, which represents that he has not taken his doctor's degree, to which he vainly objects, while still asleep, that he has
already been practising for years, or is already a university lecturer or the senior partner of a firm of lawyers, and so on. These are the ineradicablememories of the punishments we suffered as children for misdeeds which we had committed - memories which were revived in us on the dies
irae, dies illa[57] of the gruelling examination at the two critical junctures in our careers as students. The examination-anxiety of neurotics is
likewise intensified by this childish fear. When our student days are over, it is no longer our parents or teachers who see to our punishment; the
inexorable chain of cause and effect of later life has taken over our further education. Now we dream of our matriculation, or the examination for
the doctor's degree- and who has not been faint-hearted on such occasions?- whenever we fear that we may be punished by some unpleasant result
because we have done something carelessly or wrongly, because we have not been as thorough as we might have been- in short, whenever we feel
the burden of responsibility.
For a further explanation of examination-dreams I have to thank a remark made by a colleague who had studied this subject, who once stated, in
the course of a scientific discussion, that in his experience the examination-dream occurred only to persons who had passed the examination,
never to those who had flunked. We have had increasing confirmation of the fact that the anxiety-dream of examination occurs when the dreamer
is anticipating a responsible task on the following day, with the possibility of disgrace; recourse will then be had to an occasion in the past on
which a great anxiety proved to have been without real justification, having, indeed, been refuted by the outcome. Such a dream would be a very
striking example of the way in which the dream-content is misunderstood by the waking instance. The exclamation which is regarded as a protest
against the dream: "But I am already a doctor," etc., would in reality be the consolation offered by the dream, and should, therefore, be worded as
follows: "Do not be afraid of the morrow; think of the anxiety which you felt before your matriculation; yet nothing happened to justify it, for
now you are a doctor," etc. But the anxiety which we attribute to the dream really has its origin in the residues of the dream-day.
The tests of this interpretation which I have been able to make in my own case, and in that of others, although by no means exhaustive, were
entirely in its favour.[58] For example, I failed in my examination for the doctor's degree in medical jurisprudence; never once has the matter
worried me in my dreams, while I have often enough been examined in botany, zoology, and chemistry, and I sat for the examinations in these
subjects with well-justified anxiety, but escaped disaster, through the clemency of fate, or of the examiner. In my dreams of school examinations,
I am always examined in history, a subject in which I passed brilliantly at the time, but only, I must admit, because my good-natured professormy one-eyed benefactor in another dream- did not overlook the fact that on the examination-paper which I returned to him I had crossed out with
my fingernail the second of three questions, as a hint that he should not insist on it. One of my patients, who withdrew before the matriculation
examination. only to pass it later, but failed in the officer's examination, so that he did not become an officer, tells me that he often dreams of the
former examination, but never of the latter.
W. Stekel, who was the first to interpret the matriculation dream, maintains that this dream invariably refers to sexual experiences and sexual
maturity. This has frequently been confirmed in my experience. 

All other previous attempts to solve the problems of dreams have concerned themselves directly with the manifest dream-content as it is retained
in the memory. They have sought to obtain an interpretation of the dream from this content, or, if they dispensed with an interpretation, to base
their conclusions concerning the dream on the evidence provided by this content. We, however, are confronted by a different set of data; for us a
new psychic material interposes itself between the dream-content and the results of our investigations: the latent dream-content, or dreamthoughts, which are obtained only by our method. We develop the solution of the dream from this latent content, and not from the manifest dreamcontent. We are thus confronted with a new problem, an entirely novel task - that of examining and tracing the relations between the latent dreamthoughts and the manifest dream-content, and the processes by which the latter has grown out of the former.
The dream-thoughts and the dream-content present themselves as two descriptions of the same content in two different languages; or, to put it
more clearly, the dream-content appears to us as a translation of the dream-thoughts into another mode of expression, whose symbols and laws of
composition we must learn by comparing the origin with the translation. The dream-thoughts we can understand without further trouble the
moment we have ascertained them. The dream-content is, as it were, presented in hieroglyphics, whose symbols must be translated, one by one,
into the language of the dream-thoughts. It would of course, be incorrect to attempt to read these symbols in accordance with their values as
pictures, instead of in accordance with their meaning as symbols. For instance, I have before me a picture - puzzle (rebus) - a house, upon whose
roof there is a boat; then a single letter; then a running figure, whose head has been omitted, and so on. As a critic I might be tempted to judge this
composition and its elements to be nonsensical. A boat is out of place on the roof of a house, and a headless man cannot run; the man, too, is
larger than the house, and if the whole thing is meant to represent a landscape the single letters have no right in it, since they do not occur in
nature. A correct judgment of the picture-puzzle is possible only if I make no such objections to the whole and its parts, and if, on the contrary, I
take the trouble to replace each image by a syllable or word which it may represent by virtue of some allusion or relation. The words thus put
together are no longer meaningless, but might constitute the most beautiful and pregnant aphorism. Now a dream is such a picture-puzzle, and our
predecessors in the art of dream-interpretation have made the mistake of judging the rebus as an artistic composition. As such, of course, it
appears nonsensical and worthless.

The first thing that becomes clear to the investigator when he compares the dream-content with the dream-thoughts is that a tremendous work of
condensation has been accomplished. The dream is meagre, paltry and laconic in comparison with the range and copiousness of the dreamthoughts. The dream, when written down fills half a page; the analysis, which contains the dream-thoughts, requires six, eight, twelve times as 
much space. The ratio varies with different dreams; but in my experience it is always of the same order. As a rule, the extent of the compression
which has been accomplished is under-estimated, owing to the fact that the dream-thoughts which have been brought to light are believed to be
the whole of the material, whereas a continuation of the work of interpretation would reveal still further thoughts hidden in the dream. We have
already found it necessary to remark that one can never be really sure that one has interpreted a dream completely; even if the solution seems
satisfying and flawless, it is always possible that yet another meaning has been manifested by the same dream. Thus the degree of condensation is
- strictly speaking - indeterminable. Exception may be taken - and at first sight the objection seems perfectly plausible - to the assertion that the
disproportion between dream-content and dream-thoughts justifies the conclusion that a considerable condensation of psychic material occurs in
the formation of dreams. For we often have the feeling that we have been dreaming a great deal all night, and have then forgotten most of what
we have dreamed. The dream which we remember on waking would thus appear to be merely a remnant of the dream-work, which would surely
equal the dream-thoughts in range if only we could remember it completely. To a certain extent this is undoubtedly true; there is no getting away
from the fact that a dream is most accurately reproduced if we try to remember it immediately after waking, and that the recollection of it
becomes more and more defective as the day goes on. On the other hand, it has to be recognized that the impression that we have dreamed a good
deal more than we are able to reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which we shall explain later on. Moreover, the
assumption of a condensation in the dream-work is not affected by the possibility of forgetting a part of dreams, for it may be demonstrated by the
multitude of ideas pertaining to those individual parts of the dream which do remain in the memory. If a large part of the dream has really escaped
the memory, we are probably deprived of access to a new series of dream-thoughts. We have no justification for expecting that those portions of
the dream which have been lost should likewise have referred only to those thoughts which we know from the analysis of the portions which have
been preserved. [1]
In view of the very great number of ideas which analysis elicits for each individual element of the dream-content, the principal doubt in the minds
of many readers will be whether it is permissible to count everything that subsequently occurs to the mind during analysis as forming part of the
dream-thoughts - in other words, to assume that all these thoughts have been active in the sleeping state, and have taken part in the formation of
the dream. Is it not more probable that new combinations of thoughts are developed in the course of analysis, which did not participate in the
formation of the dream? To this objection I can give only a conditional reply. It is true, of course, that separate combinations of thoughts make
their first appearance during the analysis; but one can convince oneself every time this happens that such new combinations have been established
only between thoughts which have already been connected in other ways in the dream-thoughts; the new combinations are, so to speak,
corollaries, short-circuits, which are made possible by the existence of other, more fundamental modes of connection. In respect of the great
majority of the groups of thoughts revealed by analysis, we are obliged to admit that they have already been active in the formation of the dream,
for if we work through a succession of such thoughts, which at first sight seem to have played no part in the formation of the dream, we suddenly
come upon a thought which occurs in the dream-content, and is indispensable to its interpretation, but which is nevertheless inaccessible except
through this chain of thoughts. The reader may here turn to the dream of the botanical monograph, which is obviously the result of an astonishing
degree of condensation, even though I have not given the complete analysis.
But how, then, are we to imagine the psychic condition of the sleeper which precedes dreaming? Do all the dream-thoughts exist side by side, or
do they pursue one another, or are there several simultaneous trains of thought, proceeding from different centres, which subsequently meet? I do
not think it is necessary at this point to form a plastic conception of the psychic condition at the time of dream-formation. But let us not forget that
we are concerned with unconscious thinking, and that the process may easily be different from that which we observe in ourselves in deliberate
contemplation accompanied by consciousness.
The fact, however, is irrefutable that dream-formation is based on a process of condensation. How, then, is this condensation effected?
Now, if we consider that of the dream-thoughts ascertained only the most restricted number are represented in the dream by means of one of their
conceptual elements, we might conclude that the condensation is accomplished by means of omission, inasmuch as the dream is not a faithful
translation or projection, point by point, of the dream-thoughts, but a very incomplete and defective reproduction of them. This view, as we shall
soon perceive, is a very inadequate one. But for the present let us take it as a point of departure, and ask ourselves: If only a few of the elements
of the dream-thoughts make their way into the dream-content, what are the conditions that determine their selection?
In order to solve this problem, let us turn our attention to those elements of the dream-content which must have fulfilled the conditions for which
we are looking. The most suitable material for this investigation will be a dream to whose formation a particularly intense condensation has
contributed. I select the dream, cited in chapter V., of the botanical monograph.
I.
Dream-content: I have written a monograph upon a certain (indeterminate) species of plant. The book lies before me. I am just turning over a
folded coloured plate. A dried specimen of the plant is bound up in this copy, as in a herbarium.
The most prominent element of this dream is the botanical monograph. This is derived from the impressions of the dream-day; I had actually seen
a monograph on the genus Cyclamen in a bookseller's window. The mention of this genus is lacking in the dream-content; only the monograph
and its relation to botany have remained. The botanical monograph immediately reveals its relation to the work on cocaine which I once wrote;
from cocaine the train of thought proceeds on the one hand to a Festschrift, and on the other to my friend, the oculist, Dr. Koenigstein, who was 
partly responsible for the introduction of cocaine as a local anaesthetic. Moreover, Dr. Koenigstein is connected with the recollection of an
interrupted conversation I had had with him on the previous evening, and with all sorts of ideas relating to the remuneration of medical and
surgical services among colleagues. This conversation, then, is the actual dream-stimulus; the monograph on cyclamen is also a real incident, but
one of an indifferent nature; as I now see, the botanical monograph of the dream proves to be a common mean between the two experiences of the
day, taken over unchanged from an indifferent impression, and bound with the psychically significant experience by means of the most copious
associations.
Not only the combined idea of the botanical monograph, however, but also each of its separate elements, botanical and monograph, penetrates
farther and farther, by manifold associations, into the confused tangle of the dream-thoughts. To botanical belong the recollections of the person
of Professor Gartner (German: Gartner = gardener), of his blooming wife, of my patient, whose name is Flora, and of a lady concerning whom I
told the story of the forgotten flowers. Gartner, again, leads me to the laboratory and the conversation with Koenigstein; and the allusion to the
two female patients belongs to the same conversation. From the lady with the flowers a train of thoughts branches off to the favourite flowers of
my wife, whose other branch leads to the title of the hastily seen monograph. Further, botanical recalls an episode at the Gymnasium, and a
university examination; and a fresh subject - that of my hobbies - which was broached in the above-mentioned conversation, is linked up, by
means of what is humorously called my favourite flower, the artichoke, with the train of thoughts proceeding from the forgotten flowers; behind
artichoke there lies, on the one hand, a recollection of Italy, and on the other a reminiscence of a scene of my childhood, in which I first formed
an acquaintance - which has since then grown so intimate - with books. Botanical, then, is a veritable nucleus, and, for the dream, the meetingpoint of many trains of thought; which, I can testify, had all really been brought into connection by the conversation referred to. Here we find
ourselves in a thought-factory, in which, as in The Weaver's Masterpiece:
The little shuttles to and fro
Fly, and the threads unnoted flow;
One throw links up a thousand threads.
Monograph in the dream, again, touches two themes: the one-sided nature of my studies, and the costliness of my hobbies.
The impression derived from this first investigation is that the elements botanical and monograph were taken up into the dream-content because
they were able to offer the most numerous points of contact with the greatest number of dream-thoughts, and thus represented nodal points at
which a great number of the dream-thoughts met together, and because they were of manifold significance in respect of the meaning of the dream.
The fact upon which this explanation is based may be expressed in another form: Every element of the dream-content proves to be overdetermined - that is, it appears several times over in the dream-thoughts.
We shall learn more if we examine the other components of the dream in respect of their occurrence in the dream-thoughts. The coloured plate
refers (cf. the analysis in chapter V.) to a new subject, the criticism passed upon my work by colleagues, and also to a subject already represented
in the dream - my hobbies - and, further, to a memory of my childhood, in which I pull to pieces a book with coloured plates; the dried specimen
of the plant relates to my experience with the herbarium at the Gymnasium, and gives this memory particular emphasis. Thus I perceive the
nature of the relation between the dream-content and dream-thoughts: Not only are the elements of the dream determined several times over by
the dream-thoughts, but the individual dream-thoughts are represented in the dream by several elements. Starting from an element of the dream,
the path of the association leads to a number of dream-thoughts; and from a single dream-thought to several elements of the dream. In the process
of dream-formation, therefore, it is not the case that a single dream-thought, or a group of dream-thoughts, supplies the dream-content with an
abbreviation of itself as its representative, and that the next dream-thought supplies another abbreviation as its representative (much as
representatives are elected from among the population); but rather that the whole mass of the dream-thoughts is subjected to a certain elaboration,
in the course of which those elements that receive the strongest and completest support stand out in relief; so that the process might perhaps be
likened to election by the scrutin du liste. Whatever dream I may subject to such a dissection, I always find the same fundamental principle
confirmed - that the dream-elements have been formed out of the whole mass of the dream-thoughts, and that every one of them appears, in
relation to the dream-thoughts, to have a multiple determination.
It is certainly not superfluous to demonstrate this relation of the dream-content to the dream-thoughts by means of a further example, which is
distinguished by a particularly artful intertwining of reciprocal relations. The dream is that of a patient whom I am treating for claustrophobia
(fear of enclosed spaces). It will soon become evident why I feel myself called upon to entitle this exceptionally clever piece of dream-activity: 

The dreamer is driving with a great number of companions in X-street, where there is a modest hostelry (which is not the case). A theatrical
performance is being given in one of the rooms of the inn. He is first spectator, then actor. Finally the company is told to change their clothes, in
order to return to the city. Some of the company are shown into rooms on the ground floor, others to rooms on the first floor. Then a dispute
arises. The people upstairs are annoyed because those downstairs have not yet finished changing, so that they cannot come down. His brother is 
upstairs; he is downstairs; and he is angry with his brother because they are so hurried. (This part obscure.) Besides, it was already decided, upon
their arrival, who was to go upstairs and who down. Then he goes alone up the hill towards the city, and he walks so heavily, and with such
difficulty, that he cannot move from the spot. An elderly gentleman joins him and talks angrily of the King of Italy. Finally, towards the top of the
hill, he is able to walk much more easily.
The difficulty experienced in climbing the hill was so distinct that for some time after waking he was in doubt whether the experience was a
dream or the reality.
Judged by the manifest content, this dream can hardly be eulogized. Contrary to the rules, I shall begin the interpretation with that portion to
which the dreamer referred as being the most distinct.
The difficulty dreamed of, and probably experienced during the dream - difficulty in climbing, accompanied by dyspnoea - was one of the
symptoms which the patient had actually exhibited some years before, and which, in conjunction with other symptoms, was at the time attributed
to tuberculosis (probably hysterically simulated). From our study of exhibition-dreams we are already acquainted with this sensation of being
inhibited in motion, peculiar to dreams, and here again we find it utilized as material always available for the purposes of any other kind of
representation. The part of the dream-content which represents climbing as difficult at first, and easier at the top of the hill, made me think, while
it was being related, of the well-known masterly introduction to Daudet's Sappho. Here a young man carries the woman he loves upstairs; she is at
first as light as a feather, but the higher he climbs the more she weighs; and this scene is symbolic of the process of their relation, in describing
which Daudet seeks to admonish young men not to lavish an earnest affection upon girls of humble origin and dubious antecedents.[2] Although I
knew that my patient had recently had a love-affair with an actress, and had broken it off, I hardly expected to find that the interpretation which
had occurred to me was correct. The situation in Sappho is actually the reverse of that in the dream; for in the dream climbing was difficult at the
first and easy later on; in the novel the symbolism is pertinent only if what was at first easily carried finally proves to be a heavy burden. To my
astonishment, the patient remarked that the interpretation fitted in very well with the plot of a play which he had seen the previous evening. The
play was called Rund um Wien (Round about Vienna), and treated of the career of a girl who was at first respectable, but who subsequently
lapsed into the demimonde, and formed relations with highly-placed lovers, thereby climbing, but finally she went downhill faster and faster. This
play reminded him of another, entitled Von Stufe zu Stufe (From Step to Step), the poster advertising which had depicted a flight of stairs. -
To continue the interpretation: The actress with whom he had had his most recent and complicated affair had lived in X-street. There is no inn in
this street. However, while he was spending part of the summer in Vienna for the sake of this lady, he had lodged (German: abgestiegen =
stopped, literally stepped off) at a small hotel in the neighbourhood. When he was leaving the hotel, he said to the cab-driver: "I am glad at all
events that I didn't get any vermin here!" (Incidentally, the dread of vermin is one of his phobias.) Whereupon the cab-driver answered: "How
could anybody stop there! That isn't a hotel at all, it's really nothing but a pub!"
The pub immediately reminded him of a quotation:
Of a wonderful host
I was lately a guest.
But the host in the poem by Uhland is an apple-tree. Now a second quotation continues the train of thought:
FAUST (dancing with the young witch).
A lovely dream once came to me;
I then beheld an apple-tree,
And there two fairest apples shone:
They lured me so, I climbed thereon.
THE FAIR ONE
Apples have been desired by you,
Since first in Paradise they grew;
And I am moved with joy to know
That such within my garden grow.[3]
There is not the slightest doubt what is meant by the apple-tree and the apples. A beautiful bosom stood high among the charms by which the
actress had bewitched our dreamer.
Judging from the context of the analysis, we had every reason to assume that the dream referred to an impression of the dreamer's childhood. If
this is correct, it must have referred to the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who is now a man of nearly thirty years of age. The bosom of the nurse is in
reality an inn for the child. The nurse, as well as Daudet's Sappho, appears as an allusion to his recently abandoned mistress. 
The (elder) brother of the patient also appears in the dream-content; he is upstairs, while the dreamer himself is downstairs. This again is an
inversion, for the brother, as I happen to know, has lost his social position, while my patient has retained his. In relating the dream-content, the
dreamer avoided saying that his brother was upstairs and that he himself was downstairs. This would have been to obvious an expression, for in
Austria we say that a man is on the ground floor when he has lost his fortune and social position, just as we say that he has come down. Now the
fact that at this point in the dream something is represented as inverted must have a meaning; and the inversion must apply to some other relation
between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content. There is an indication which suggests how this inversion is to be understood. It obviously
applies to the end of the dream, where the circumstances of climbing are the reverse of those described in Sappho. Now it is evident what
inversion is meant: In Sappho the man carries the woman who stands in a sexual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts, conversely, there is a
reference to a woman carrying a man: and, as this could occur only in childhood, the reference is once more to the nurse who carries the heavy
child. Thus the final portion of the dream succeeds in representing Sappho and the nurse in the same allusion.
Just as the name Sappho has not been selected by the poet without reference to a Lesbian practise, so the portions of the dream in which people
are busy upstairs and downstairs, above and beneath, point to fancies of a sexual content with which the dreamer is occupied, and which, as
suppressed cravings, are not unconnected with his neurosis. Dream-interpretation itself does not show that these are fancies and not memories of
actual happenings; it only furnishes us with a set of thoughts and leaves it to us to determine their actual value. In this case real and imagined
happenings appear at first as of equal value - and not only here, but also in the creation of more important psychic structures than dreams. A large
company, as we already know, signifies a secret. The brother is none other than a representative, drawn into the scenes of childhood by fancying
backwards, of all of the subsequent for women's favours. Through the medium of an experience indifferent in itself, the episode of the gentleman
who talks angrily of the King of Italy refers to the intrusion of people of low rank into aristocratic society. It is as though the warning which
Daudet gives to young men were to be supplemented by a similar warning applicable to a suckling child.[4]
In the two dreams here cited I have shown by italics where one of the elements of the dream recurs in the dream-thoughts, in order to make the
multiple relations of the former more obvious. Since, however, the analysis of these dreams has not been carried to completion, it will probably
be worth while to consider a dream with a full analysis, in order to demonstrate the manifold determination of the dream-content. For this purpose
I shall select the dream of Irma's injection (see chapter II). From this example we shall readily see that the condensation-work in the dreamformation has made use of more means than one.
The chief person in the dream-content is my patient Irma, who is seen with the features which belong to her waking life, and who therefore, in the
first instance, represents herself. But her attitude, as I examine her at the window, is taken from a recollection of another person, of the lady for
whom I should like to exchange my patient, as is shown by the dream-thoughts. Inasmuch as Irma has a diphtheritic membrane, which recalls my
anxiety about my eldest daughter, she comes to represent this child of mine, behind whom, connected with her by the identity of their names, is
concealed the person of the patient who died from the effects of poison. In the further course of the dream the Significance of Irma's personality
changes (without the alteration of her image as it is seen in the dream): she becomes one of the children whom we examine in the public
dispensaries for children's diseases, where my friends display the differences in their mental capacities. The transition was obviously effected by
the idea of my little daughter. Owing to her unwillingness to open her mouth, the same Irma constitutes an allusion to another lady who was
examined by me, and, also in the same connection, to my wife. Further, in the morbid changes which I discover in her throat I have summarized
allusions to quite a number of other persons.
All these people whom I encounter as I follow up the associations suggested by Irma do not appear personally in the dream; they are concealed
behind the dream-person Irma, who is thus developed into a collective image, which, as might be expected, has contradictory features. Irma
comes to represent these other persons, who are discarded in the work of condensation, inasmuch as I allow anything to happen to her which
reminds me of these persons, trait by trait.
For the purposes of dream-condensation I may construct a composite person in yet another fashion, by combining the actual features of two or
more persons in a single dream-image. It is in this fashion that the Dr. M of my dream was constructed; he bears the name of Dr. M, and he
speaks and acts as Dr. M does, but his bodily characteristics and his malady belong to another person, my eldest brother; a single feature,
paleness, is doubly determined, owing to the fact that it is common to both persons. Dr. R, in my dream about my uncle, is a similar composite
person. But here the dream-image is constructed in yet another fashion. I have not united features peculiar to the one person with the features of
the other, thereby abridging by certain features the memory-picture of each; but I have adopted the method employed by Galton in producing
family portraits; namely, I have superimposed the two images, so that the common features stand out in stronger relief, while those which do not
coincide neutralize one another and become indistinct. In the dream of my uncle the fair beard stands out in relief, as an emphasized feature, from
a physiognomy which belongs to two persons, and which is consequently blurred; further, in its reference to growing grey the beard contains an
allusion to my father and to myself.
The construction of collective and composite persons is one of the principal methods of dream-condensation. We shall presently have occasion to
deal with this in another connection.
The notion of dysentry in the dream of Irma's injection has likewise a multiple determination; on the one hand, because of its paraphasic
assonance with diphtheria. and on the other because of its reference to the patient whom I sent to the East, and whose hysteria had been wrongly
diagnosed. 
The mention of propyls in the dream proves again to be an interesting case of condensation. Not propyls but amyls were included in the dreamthoughts. One might think that here a simple displacement had occured in the course of dream-formation. This is in fact the case, but the
displacement serves the purposes of the condensation, as is shown from the following supplementary analysis: If I dwell for a moment upon the
word propylen (German) its assonance with the word propylaeum suggests itself to me. But a propylaeum is to be found not only in Athens, but
also in Munich. In the latter city, a year before my dream, I had visited a friend who was seriously ill, and the reference to him in trimethylamin,
which follows closely upon propyls, is unmistakable.
I pass over the striking circumstance that here, as elsewhere in the analysis of dreams, associations of the most widely differing values are
employed for making thought-connections as though they were equivalent, and I yield to the temptation to regard the procedure by which amyls
in the dream-thoughts are replaced in the dream-content by propyls as a sort of plastic process.
On the one hand, here is the group of ideas relating to my friend Otto, who does not understand me, thinks I am in the wrong, and gives me the
liqueur that smells of amyls; on the other hand, there is the group of ideas - connected with the first by contrast - relating to my Berlin friend who
does understand me, who would always think that I was right, and to whom I am indebted for so much valuable information concerning the
chemistry of sexual processes.
What elements in the Otto group are to attract my particular attention are determined by the recent circumstances which are responsible for the
dream; amyls belong to the element so distinguished, which are predestined to find their way into the dream-content. The large group of ideas
centering upon William is actually stimulated by the contrast between William and Otto, and those elements in it are emphasized which are in
tune with those already stirred up in the Otto group. In the whole of this dream I am continually recoiling from somebody who excites my
displeasure towards another person with whom I can at will confront the first; trait by trait I appeal to the friend as against the enemy. Thus amyls
in the Otto group awakes recollections in the other group, also belonging to the region of chemistry; trimethylamin, which receives support from
several quarters, finds its way into the dream-content. Amyls, too, might have got into the dream-content unchanged, but it yields to the influence
of the William group, inasmuch as out of the whole range of recollections covered by this name an element is sought out which is able to furnish
a double determination for amyls. Propyls is closely associated with amyls; from the William group comes Munich with its propylaeum. Both
groups are united in propyls - propylaeum. As though by a compromise, this intermediate element then makes its way into the dream-content.
Here a common mean which permits of a multiple determination has been created. It thus becomes palpable that a multiple determination must
facilitate penetration into the dream-content. For the purpose of this mean-formation a displacement of the attention has been unhesitatingly
effected from what is really intended to something adjacent to it in the associations.
The study of the dream of Irma's injection has now enabled us to obtain some insight into the process of condensation which occurs in the
formation of dreams. We perceive, as peculiarities of the condensing process, a selection of those elements which occur several times over in the
dream-content, the formation of new unities (composite persons, mixed images), and the production of common means. The purpose which is
served by condensation, and the means by which it is brought about, will be investigated when we come to study in all their bearings the psychic
processes at work in the formation of dreams. Let us for the present be content with establishing the fact of dream-condensation as a relation
between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content which deserves attention.
The condensation-work of dreams becomes most palpable when it takes words and means as its objects. Generally speaking, words are often
treated in dreams as things, and therefore undergo the same combinations as the ideas of things. The results of such dreams are comical and
bizarre word-formations.
1. A colleague sent an essay of his, in which he had, in my opinion, overestimated the value of a recent physiological discovery, and had
expressed himself, moreover, in extravagant terms. On the following night I dreamed a sentence which obviously referred to this essay: "That is a
truly norekdal style." The solution of this word-formation at first gave me some difficulty; it was unquestionably formed as a parody of the
superlatives colossal, pyramidal; but it was not easy to say where it came from. At last the monster fell apart into the two names Nora and Ekdal,
from two well-known plays by Ibsen. I had previously read a newspaper article on Ibsen by the writer whose latest work I was now criticizing in
my dream.
2. One of my female patients dreams that a man with a fair beard and a peculiar glittering eye is pointing to a sign-board attached to a tree which
reads: uclamparia - wet.[5]
Analysis. - The man was rather authoritative-looking, and his peculiar glittering eye at once recalled the church of San Paolo, near Rome, where
she had seen the mosaic portraits of the Popes. One of the early Popes had a golden eye (this is really an optical illusion, to which the guides
usually call attention). Further associations showed that the general physiognomy of the man corresponded with her own clergyman (pope), and
the shape of the fair beard recalled her doctor (myself), while the stature of the man in the dream recalled her father. All these persons stand in the
same relation to her; they are all guiding and directing the course of her life. On further questioning, the golden eye recalled gold - money - the
rather expensive psycho-analytic treatment, which gives her a great deal of concern. Gold, moreover, recalls the gold cure for alcoholism - Herr
D, whom she would have married, if it had not been for his clinging to the disgusting alcohol habit - she does not object to anyone's taking an 
occasional drink; she herself sometimes drinks beer and liqueurs. This again brings her back to her visit to San Paolo (fuori la mura) and its
surroundings. She remembers that in the neighbouring monastery of the Tre Fontane she drank a liqueur made of eucalyptus by the Trappist
monks of the monastery. She then relates how the monks transformed this malarial and swampy region into a dry and wholesome neighbourhood
by planting numbers of eucalyptus trees. The word uclamparia then resolves itself into eucalyptus and malaria, and the word wet refers to the
former swampy nature of the locality. Wet also suggests dry. Dry is actually the name of the man whom she would have married but for his overindulgence in alcohol. The peculiar name of Dry is of Germanic origin (drei = three) and hence, alludes to the monastery of the Three (drei)
Fountains. In talking of Mr. Dry's habit she used the strong expression: "He could drink a fountain." Mr. Dry jocosely refers to his habit by
saying: "You know I must drink because I am always dry" (referring to his name). The eucalyptus refers also to her neurosis, which was at first
diagnosed as malaria. She went to Italy because her attacks of anxiety, which were accompanied by marked rigors and shivering, were thought to
be of malarial origin. She bought some eucalyptus oil from the monks, and she maintains that it has done her much good.
The condensation uclamparia - wet is, therefore, the point of junction for the dream as well as for the neurosis.
3. In a rather long and confused dream of my own, the apparent nucleus of which is a sea-voyage, it occurs to me that the next port is Hearsing,
and next after that Fliess. The latter is the name of my friend in B, to which city I have often journeyed. But Hearsing is put together from the
names of the places in the neighbourhood of Vienna, which so frequently end in "ing": Hietzing, Liesing, Moedling (the old Medelitz, meae
deliciae, my joy; that is, my own name, the German for joy being Freude), and the English hearsay, which points to calumny, and establishes the
relation to the indifferent dream-stimulus of the day - a poem in Fliegende Blatter about a slanderous dwarf, Sagter Hatergesagt (Saidhe
Hashesaid). By the combination of the final syllable ing with the name Fliess, Vlissingen is obtained, which is a real port through which my
brother passes when he comes to visit us from England. But the English for Vlissingen is Flushing, which signifies blushing, and recalls patients
suffering from erythrophobia (fear of blushing), whom I sometimes treat, and also a recent publication of Bechterew's, relating to this neurosis,
the reading of which angered me.[6]
4. Upon another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate parts. The first was the vividly remembered word Autodidasker: the
second was a faithful reproduction in the dream-content of a short and harmless fancy which had been developed a few days earlier, and which
was to the effect that I must tell Professor N, when I next saw him: "The patient about whose condition I last consulted you is really suffering
from a neurosis, just as you suspected." So not only must the newly-coined Autodidasker satisfy the requirement that it should contain or
represent a compressed meaning, but this meaning must have a valid connection with my resolve - repeated from waking life - to give Professor
N due credit for his diagnosis.
Now Autodidasker is easily separated into author (German, Autor), autodidact, and Lasker, with whom is associated the name Lasalle. The first
of these words leads to the occasion of the dream - which this time is significant. I had brought home to my wife several volumes by a wellknown author who is a friend of my brother's, and who, as I have learned, comes from the same neighbourhood as myself (J. J. David). One
evening she told me how profoundly impressed she had been by the pathetic sadness of a story in one of David's novels (a story of wasted
talents), and our conversation turned upon the signs of talent which we perceive in our own children. Under the influence of what she had just
read, my wife expressed some concern about our children, and I comforted her with the remark that precisely such dangers as she feared can be
averted by training. During the night my thoughts proceeded farther, took up my wife's concern for the children, and interwove with it all sorts of
other things. Something which the novelist had said to my brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by-path which might lead to
representation in the dream. This path led to Breslau; a lady who was a very good friend of ours had married and gone to live there. I found in
Breslau Lasker and Lasalle, two examples to justify the fear lest our boys should be ruined by women, examples which enabled me to represent
simultaneously two ways of influencing a man to his undoing. [7] The Cherchez la femme, by which these thoughts may be summarized, leads
me, if taken in another sense, to my brother, who is still married and whose name is Alexander. Now I see that Alex, as we abbreviate the name,
sounds almost like an inversion of Lasker, and that this fact must have contributed to send my thoughts on a detour by way of Breslau.
But the playing with names and syllables in which I am here engaged has yet another meaning. It represents the wish that my brother may enjoy a
happy family life, and this in the following manner: In the novel of artistic life, L'OEuvre, which, by virtue of its content, must have been in
association with my dream-thoughts, the author, as is well-known, has incidentally given a description of his own person and his own domestic
happiness, and appears under the name of Sandoz. In the metamorphosis of his name he probably went to work as follows: Zola, when inverted
(as children are fond of inverting names) gives Aloz. But this was still too undisguised; he therefore replaced the syllable Al, which stands at the
beginning of the name Alexander, by the third syllable of the same name, sand, and thus arrived at Sandoz. My autodidasker originated in a
similar fashion.
My phantasy - that I am telling Professor N that the patient whom we have both seen is suffering from a neurosis - found its way into the dream in
the following manner: Shortly before the close of my working year, I had a patient in whose case my powers of diagnosis failed me. A serious
organic trouble - possibly some alterative degeneration of the spinal cord - was to be assumed, but could not be conclusively demonstrated. It
would have been tempting to diagnose the trouble as a neurosis, and this would have put an end to all my difficulties, but for the fact that the
sexual anamnesis, failing which I am unwilling to admit a neurosis, was so energetically denied by the patient. In my embarrassment I called to
my assistance the physician whom I respect most of all men (as others do also), and to whose authority I surrender most completely. He listened
to my doubts, told me he thought them justified, and then said: "Keep on observing the man, it is probably a neurosis." Since I know that he does
not share my opinions concerning the aetiology of the neuroses, I refrained from contradicting him, but I did not conceal my scepticism. A few 
days later I informed the patient that I did not know what to do with him, and advised him to go to someone else. Thereupon, to my great
astonishment, he began to beg my pardon for having lied to me: he had felt so ashamed; and now he revealed to me just that piece of sexual
aetiology which I had expected, and which I found necessary for assuming the existence of a neurosis. This was a relief to me, but at the same
time a humiliation; for I had to admit that my consultant, who was not disconcerted by the absence of anamnesis, had judged the case more
correctly. I made up my mind to tell him, when next I saw him, that he had been right and I had been wrong.
This is just what I do in the dream. But what sort of a wish is fulfilled if I acknowledge that I am mistaken? This is precisely my wish; I wish to
be mistaken as regards my fears - that is to say, I wish that my wife, whose fears I have appropriated in my dream-thoughts, may prove to be
mistaken. The subject to which the fact of being right or wrong is related in the dream is not far removed from that which is really of interest to
the dream-thoughts. We have the same pair of alternatives, of either organic or functional impairment caused by a woman, or actually by the
sexual life - either tabetic paralysis or a neurosis - with which latter the nature of Lasalle's undoing is indirectly connected.
In this well-constructed (and on careful analysis quite transparent) dream, Professor N appears not merely on account of this analogy, and my
wish to be proved mistaken, or the associated references to Breslau and to the family of our married friend who lives there, but also on account of
the following little dialogue which followed our consultation: After he had acquitted himself of his professional duties by making the abovementioned suggestion, Dr. N proceeded to discuss personal matters. "How many children have you now?" - "Six." - A thoughtful and respectful
gesture. - "Girls, boys?" - "Three of each. They are my pride and my riches." - "Well, you must be careful; there is no difficulty about the girls,
but the boys are a difficulty later on as regards their upbringing." I replied that until now they had been very tractable; obviously this prognosis of
my boys' future pleased me as little as his diagnosis of my patient, whom he believed to be suffering only from a neurosis. These two impressions,
then, are connected by their continuity, by their being successively received; and when I incorporate the story of the neurosis into the dream, I
substitute it for the conversation on the subject of upbringing, which is even more closely connected with the dream-thoughts, since it touches so
closely upon the anxiety subsequently expressed by my wife. Thus, even my fear that N may prove to be right in his remarks on the difficulties to
be met with in bringing up boys is admitted into the dream-content, inasmuch as it is concealed behind the representation of my wish that I may
be wrong to harbour such apprehensions. The same phantasy serves without alteration to represent both the conflicting alternatives.
Examination-dreams present the same difficulties to interpretation that I have already described as characteristic of most typical dreams. The
associative material which the dreamer supplies only rarely suffices for interpretation. A deeper understanding of such dreams has to be
accumulated from a considerable number of examples. Not long ago I arrived at a conviction that reassurances like "But you already are a
doctor," and so on, not only convey a consolation but imply a reproach as well. This would have run: "You are already so old, so far advanced in
life, and yet you still commit such follies, are guilty of such childish behaviour." This mixture of self-criticism and consolation would correspond
with the examination-dreams. After this it is no longer surprising that the reproaches in the last analysed examples concerning follies and childish
behaviour should relate to repetitions of reprehensible sexual acts.
The verbal transformations in dreams are very similar to those which are known to occur in paranoia, and which are observed also in hysteria and
obsessions. The linguistic tricks of children, who at a certain age actually treat words as objects, and even invent new languages and artificial
syntaxes, are a common source of such occurrences both in dreams and in the psychoneuroses.
The analysis of nonsensical word-formations in dreams is particularly well suited to demonstrate the degree of condensation effected in the dreamwork. From the small number of the selected examples here considered it must not be concluded that such material is seldom observed or is at all
exceptional. It is, on the contrary, very frequent, but, owing to the dependence of dream interpretation on psychoanalytic treatment, very few
examples are noted down and reported, and most of the analyses which are reported are comprehensible only to the specialist in neuropathology.
When a spoken utterance, expressly distinguished as such from a thought, occurs in a dream, it is an invariable rule that the dream-speech has
originated from a remembered speech in the dream-material. The wording of the speech has either been preserved in its entirety or has been
slightly altered in expression. frequently the dream-speech is pieced together from different recollections of spoken remarks; the wording has
remained the same, but the sense has perhaps become ambiguous, or differs from the wording. Not infrequently the dream-speech serves merely
as an allusion to an incident in connection with which the remembered speech was made.[8]
Another and probably no less significant relation must have already forced itself upon our attention while we were collecting examples of dreamcondensation. We may have noticed that these elements which obtrude themselves in the dream-content as its essential components do not by any
means play this same part in the dream-thoughts. As a corollary to this, the converse of this statement is also true. That which is obviously the
essential content of the dream-thoughts need not be represented at all in the dream. The dream is, as it were, centred elsewhere; its content is
arranged about elements which do not constitute the central point of the dream-thoughts. Thus, for example, in the dream of the botanical
monograph the central point of the dream-content is evidently the element botanical; in the dream-thoughts, we are concerned with the
complications and conflicts resulting from services rendered between colleagues which place them under mutual obligations; later on with the
reproach that I am in the habit of sacrificing too much time to my hobbies; and the element botanical finds no place in this nucleus of the dreamthoughts, unless it is loosely connected with it by antithesis, for botany was never among my favourite subjects. In the Sappho-dream of my 
patient, ascending and descending, being upstairs and down, is made the central point; the dream, however, is concerned with the danger of
sexual relations with persons of low degree; so that only one of the elements of the dream-thoughts seems to have found its way into the dreamcontent, and this is unduly expanded. Again, in the dream of my uncle, the fair beard, which seems to be its central point, appears to have no
rational connection with the desire for greatness which we have recognized as the nucleus of the dream-thoughts. Such dreams very naturally give
us an impression of a displacement. In complete contrast to these examples, the dream of Irma's injection shows that individual elements may
claim the same place in dream-formation as that which they occupy in the dream-thoughts. The recognition of this new and utterly inconstant
relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content will probably astonish us at first. If we find, in a psychic process of normal life, that
one idea has been selected from among a number of others, and has acquired a particular emphasis in our consciousness, we are wont to regard
this as proof that a peculiar psychic value (a certain degree of interest) attaches to the victorious idea. We now discover that this value of the
individual element in the dream-thoughts is not retained in dream-formation, or is not taken into account. For there is no doubt which of the
elements of the dream-thoughts are of the highest value; our judgment informs us immediately. In dream-formation the essential elements, those
that are emphasized by intensive interest, may be treated as though they were subordinate, while they are replaced in the dream by other elements,
which were certainly subordinate in the dream-thoughts. It seems at first as though the psychic intensity[9] of individual ideas were of no account
in their selection for dream-formation, but only their greater or lesser multiplicity of determination. One might be inclined to think that what gets
into the dream is not what is important in the dream-thoughts, but what is contained in them several times over; but our understanding of dreamformation is not much advanced by this assumption; to begin with, we cannot believe that the two motives of multiple determination and intrinsic
value can influence the selection of the dream otherwise than in the same direction. Those ideas in the dream-thoughts which are most important
are probably also those which recur most frequently, since the individual dream-thoughts radiate from them as centres. And yet the dream may
reject these intensely emphasized and extensively reinforced elements, and may take up into its content other elements which are only extensively
reinforced.
This difficulty may be solved if we follow up yet another impression received during the investigation of the over-determination of the dreamcontent. Many readers of this investigation may already have decided, in their own minds, that the discovery of the multiple determination of the
dream-elements is of no great importance, because it is inevitable. Since in analysis we proceed from the dream-elements, and register all the
ideas which associate themselves with these elements, is it any wonder that these elements should recur with peculiar frequency in the thoughtmaterial obtained in this manner? While I cannot admit the validity of this objection, I am now going to say something that sounds rather like it:
Among the thoughts which analysis brings to light are many which are far removed from the nucleus of the dream, and which stand out like
artificial interpolations made for a definite purpose. Their purpose may readily be detected; they establish a connection, often a forced and farfetched connection, between the dream-content and the dream-thoughts, and in many cases, if these elements were weeded out of the analysis, the
components of the dream-content would not only not be over-determined, but they would not be sufficiently determined. We are thus led to the
conclusion that multiple determination, decisive as regards the selection made by the dream, is perhaps not always a primary factor in dreamformation, but is often a secondary product of a psychic force which is as yet unknown to us. Nevertheless, it must be of importance for the
entrance of the individual elements into the dream, for we may observe that, in cases where multiple determination does not proceed easily from
the dream-material, it is brought about with a certain effort.
It now becomes very probable that a psychic force expresses itself in the dream-work which, on the one hand, strips the elements of the high
psychic value of their intensity and, on the other hand, by means of over-determination, creates new significant values from elements of slight
value, which new values then make their way into the dream-content. Now if this is the method of procedure, there has occurred in the process of
dream-formation a transference and displacement of the psychic intensities of the individual elements, from which results the textual difference
between the dream-content and the thought-content. The process which we here assume to be operative is actually the most essential part of the
dream-work; it may fitly be called dream-displacement. Dream-displacement and dream-condensation are the two craftsmen to whom we may
chiefly ascribe the structure of the dream.
I think it will be easy to recognize the psychic force which expresses itself in dream-displacement. The result of this displacement is that the
dream-content no longer has any likeness to the nucleus of the dream-thoughts, and the dream reproduces only a distorted form of the dream-wish
in the unconscious. But we are already acquainted with dream-distortion; we have traced it back to the censorship which one psychic instance in
the psychic life exercises over another. Dream-displacement is one of the chief means of achieving this distortion. Is fecit, cui profuit.[10] We
must assume that dream-displacement is brought about by the influence of this censorship, the endopsychic defence.[11]
"Concerning a man who possesses the remarkable faculty of never dreaming nonsense...."
"Your marvellous faculty of dreaming as if you were awake is based upon your virtues, upon your goodness, your justice, and your love of truth;
it is the moral clarity of your nature which makes everything about you intelligible to me."
"But if I really give thought to the matter," was the reply, "I almost believe that all men are made as I am, and that no one ever dreams nonsense!
A dream which one remembers so distinctly that one can relate it afterwards, and which, therefore, is no dream of delirium, always has a
meaning; why, it cannot be otherwise! For that which is in contradiction to itself can never be combined into a whole. The fact that time and
space are often thoroughly shaken up, detracts not at all from the real content of the dream, because both are without any significance whatever
for its essential content. We often do the same thing in waking life; think of fairy-tales, of so many bold and pregnant creations of fantasy, of
which only a foolish person would say: 'That is nonsense! For it isn't possible.'" 
"If only it were always possible to interpret dreams correctly, as you have just done with mine!" said the friend.
"That is certainly not an easy task, but with a little attention it must always be possible to the dreamer. You ask why it is generally impossible? In
your case there seems to be something veiled in your dreams, something unchaste in a special and exalted fashion, a certain secrecy in your
nature, which it is difficult to fathom; and that is why your dreams so often seem to be without meaning, or even nonsensical. But in the
profoundest sense, this is by no means the case; indeed it cannot be, for a man is always the same person, whether he wakes or dreams."
The manner in which the factors of displacement, condensation and over-determination interact with one another in dream-formation - which is
the ruling factor and which the subordinate one - all this will be reserved as a subject for later investigation. In the meantime, we may state, is a
second condition which the elements that find their way into the dream must satisfy, that they must be withdrawn from the resistance of the
censorship. But henceforth, in the interpretation of dreams, we shall reckon with dream-displacement as an unquestionable fact. 
Besides the two factors of condensation and displacement in dreams, which we have found to be at work in the transformation of the latent dreammaterial into the manifest dream-content, we shall, in the course of this investigation, come upon two further conditions which exercise an
unquestionable influence over the selection of the material that eventually appears in the dream. But first, even at the risk of seeming to interrupt
our progress, I shall take a preliminary glance at the processes by which the interpretation of dreams is accomplished. I do not deny that the best
way of explaining them, and of convincing the critic of their reliability, would be to take a single dream as an example, to detail its interpretation,
as I did (in Chapter II) in the case of the dream of Irma's injection, but then to assemble the dream-thoughts which I had discovered, and from
them to reconstruct the formation of the dream - that is to say, to supplement dream-analysis by dream-synthesis. I have done this with several
specimens for my own instruction; but I cannot undertake to do it here, as I am prevented by a number of considerations (relating to the psychic
material necessary for such a demonstration) such as any right-thinking person would approve. In the analysis of dreams these considerations
present less difficulty, for an analysis may be incomplete and still retain its value, even if it leads only a little way into the structure of the dream.
I do not see how a synthesis, to be convincing, could be anything short of complete. I could give a complete synthesis only of the dreams of such
persons as are unknown to the reading public. Since, however, neurotic patients are the only persons who furnish me with the means of making
such a synthesis, this part of the description of dreams must be postponed until I can carry the psychological explanation of the neuroses far
enough to demonstrate their relation to our subject.[12] This will be done elsewhere.
From my attempts to construct dreams synthetically from their dream-thoughts, I know that the material which is yielded by interpretation varies
in value. Part of it consists of the essential dream-thoughts, which would completely replace the dream and would in themselves be a sufficient
substitute for it, were there no dream-censorship. To the other part, one is wont to ascribe slight importance, nor does one set any value on the
assertion that all these thoughts have participated in the formation of the dream; on the contrary, they may include notions which are associated
with experiences that have occurred subsequently to the dream, between the dream and the interpretation. This part comprises not only all the
connecting-paths which have led from the manifest to the latent dream-content, but also the intermediate and approximating associations by
means of which one has arrived at a knowledge of these connecting-paths during the work of interpretation.
At this point we are interested exclusively in the essential dream-thoughts. These commonly reveal themselves as a complex of thoughts and
memories of the most intricate possible construction, with all the characteristics of the thought-processes known to us in waking life. Not
infrequently they are trains of thought which proceed from more than one centre, but which are not without points of contact; and almost
invariably we find, along with a train of thought, its contradictory counterpart, connected with it by the association of contrast.
The individual parts of this complicated structure naturally stand in the most manifold logical relations to one another. They constitute foreground
and background, digressions, illustrations, conditions, lines of argument and objections. When the whole mass of these dream-thoughts is
subjected to the pressure of the dream-work, during which the fragments are turned about, broken up and compacted, somewhat like drifting ice,
the question arises: What becomes of the logical ties which had hitherto provided the framework of the structure? What representation do if,
because, as though, although, either-or and all the other conjunctions, without which we cannot understand a phrase or a sentence, receive in our
dreams?
To begin with, we must answer that the dream has at its disposal no means of representing these logical relations between the dream-thoughts. In
most cases it disregards all these conjunctions, and undertakes the elaboration only of the material content of the dream-thoughts. It is left to the
interpretation of the dream to restore the coherence which the dream-work has destroyed.
If dreams lack the ability to express these relations, the psychic material of which they are wrought must be responsible for this defect. As a
matter of fact, the representative arts - painting and sculpture - are similarly restricted, as compared with poetry, which is able to employ speech;
and here again the reason for this limitation lies in the material by the elaboration of which the two plastic arts endeavour to express something.
Before the art of painting arrived at an understanding of the laws of expression by which it is bound, it attempted to make up for this deficiency.
In old paintings little labels hung out of the mouths of the persons represented, giving in writing the speech which the artist despaired of 
expressing in the picture.
Here, perhaps an objection will be raised, challenging the assertion that our dreams dispense with the representation of logical relations. There aredreams in which the most complicated intellectual operations take place; arguments for and against are adduced, jokes and comparisons are made,just as in our waking thoughts. But here again appearances are deceptive; if the interpretation of such dreams is continued it will be found that all
these things are dream-material, not the representation of intellectual activity in the dream. The content of the dream-thoughts is reproduced by
the apparent thinking in our dreams, but not the relations of the dream-thoughts to one another, in the determination of which relations thinking
consists. I shall give some examples of this. But the fact which is most easily established is that all speeches which occur in dreams, and which
are expressly designated as such, are unchanged or only slightly modified replicas of speeches which occur likewise among the memories in the
dream-material. Often the speech is only an allusion to an event contained in the dream-thoughts; the meaning of the dream is quite different.
However, I shall not dispute the fact that even critical thought - activity, which does not simply repeat material from the dream - thoughts, plays a
part in dream-formation. I shall have to explain the influence of this factor at the close of this discussion. It will then become clear that this
thought activity is evoked not by the dream-thoughts, but by the dream itself, after it is, in a certain sense, already completed.
Provisionally, then, it is agreed that the logical relations between the dream-thoughts do not obtain any particular representation in the dream. Forinstance, where there is a contradiction in the dream, this is either a contradiction directed against the dream itself or a contradiction contained in
one of the dream-thoughts; a contradiction in the dream corresponds with a contradiction between the dream-thoughts only in the most indirect
and intermediate fashion.
But just as the art of painting finally succeeded in depicting, in the persons represented, at least the intentions behind their words - tenderness,
menace, admonition, and the like - by other means than by floating labels, so also the dream has found it possible to render an account of certain
of the logical relations between its dream-thoughts by an appropriate modification of the peculiar method of dream-representation. It will be
found by experience that different dreams go to different lengths in this respect; while one dream will entirely disregard the logical structure of its
material, another attempts to indicate it as completely as possible. In so doing, the dream departs more or less widely from the text which it has to
elaborate; and its attitude is equally variable in respect to the temporal articulation of the dream-thoughts, if such has been established in the
unconscious (as, for example, in the dream of Irma's injection).
But what are the means by which the dream-work is enabled to indicate those relations in the dream-material which are difficult to represent? I
shall attempt to enumerate these, one by one.
In the first place, the dream renders an account of the connection which is undeniably present between all the portions of the dream-thoughts by
combining this material into a unity as a situation or a proceeding. It reproduces logical connections in the form of simultaneity; in this case it
behaves rather like the painter who groups together all the philosophers or poets in a picture of the School of Athens, or Parnassus. They never
were assembled in any hall or on any mountain-top, although to the reflective mind they do constitute a community.
The dream carries out in detail this mode of representation. Whenever it shows two elements close together, it vouches for a particularly intimate
connection between their corresponding representatives in the dream-thoughts. It is as in our method of writing: to signifies that the two letters
are to be pronounced as one syllable; while t with o following a blank space indicates that t is the last letter of one word and o the first letter of
another. Consequently, dream-combinations are not made up of arbitrary, completely incongruous elements of the dream-material, but of
elements that are pretty intimately related in the dream-thoughts also.
For representing causal relations our dreams employ two methods, which are essentially reducible to one. The method of representation more
frequently employed - in cases, for example, where the dream-thoughts are to the effect: "Because this was thus and thus, this and that must
happen" - consists in making the subordinate clause a prefatory dream and joining the principal clause on to it in the form of the main dream. If
my interpretation is correct, the sequence may likewise be reversed. The principal clause always corresponds to that part of the dream which is
elaborated in the greatest detail.
An excellent example of such a representation of causality was once provided by a female patient, whose dream I shall subsequently give in full.
The dream consisted of a short prologue, and of a very circumstantial and very definitely centred dream-composition. I might entitle it "Flowery
language." The preliminary dream is as follows: She goes to the two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare "a little
bite of food." She also sees a very large number of heavy kitchen utensils in the kitchen turned upside down in order to drain, even heaped up in
stacks. The two maids go to fetch water, and have, as it were, to climb into a river, which reaches up to the house or into the courtyard.
Then follows the main dream, which begins as follows: She is climbing down from a height over a curiously shaped trellis, and she is glad that
her dress doesn't get caught anywhere, etc. Now the preliminary dream refers to the house of the lady's parents. The words which are spoken in
the kitchen are words which she has probably often heard spoken by her mother. The piles of clumsy pots and pans are taken from an
unpretentious hardware shop located in the same house. The second part of this dream contains an allusion to the dreamer's father, who was
always pestering the maids, and who during a flood - for the house stood close to the bank of the river - contracted a fatal illness. The thought 
which is concealed behind the preliminary dream is something like this: "Because I was born in this house, in such sordid and unpleasant
surroundings..." The main dream takes up the same thought, and presents it in a form that has been altered by a wish-fulfilment: "I am of exalted
origin." Properly then: "Because I am of such humble origin, the course of my life has been so and so."
As far as I can see, the division of a dream into two unequal portions does not always signify a causal relation between the thoughts of the two
portions. It often seems as though in the two dreams the same material were presented from different points of view; this is certainly the case
when a series of dreams, dreamed the same night, end in a seminal emission, the somatic need enforcing a more and more definite expression. Or
the two dreams have proceeded from two separate centres in the dream-material, and they overlap one another in the content, so that the subject
which in one dream constitutes the centre cooperates in the other as an allusion, and vice versa. But in a certain number of dreams the division
into short preliminary dreams and long subsequent dreams actually signifies a causal relation between the two portions. The other method of
representing the causal relation is employed with less comprehensive material, and consists in the transformation of an image in the dream into
another image, whether it be of a person or a thing. Only where this transformation is actually seen occurring in the dream shall we seriously
insist on the causal relation; not where we simply note that one thing has taken the place of another. I said that both methods of representing the
causal relation are really reducible to the same method; in both cases causation is represented by succession, sometimes by the succession of
dreams, sometimes by the immediate transformation of one image into another. In the great majority of cases, of course, the causal relation is not
represented at all, but is effaced amidst the succession of elements that is unavoidable even in the dream-process.
Dreams are quite incapable of expressing the alternative either-or; it is their custom to take both members of this alternative into the same context,
as though they had an equal right to be there. A classic example of this is contained in the dream of Irma's injection. Its latent thoughts obviously
mean: I am not responsible for the persistence of Irma's pains; the responsibility rests either with her resistance to accepting the solution or with
the fact that she is living under unfavourable sexual conditions, which I am unable to change, or her pains are not hysterical at all, but organic.
The dream, however, carries out all these possibilities, which are almost mutually exclusive, and is quite ready to add a fourth solution derived
from the dream-wish. After interpreting the dream, I then inserted the either-or in its context in the dream-thoughts.
But when in narrating a dream the narrator is inclined to employ the alternative either-or: "It was either a garden or a living-room," etc., there is
not really an alternative in the dream-thoughts, but an and - a simple addition. When we use either-or we are as a rule describing a quality of
vagueness in some element of the dream, but a vagueness which may still be cleared up. The rule to be applied in this case is as follows: The
individual members of the alternative are to be treated as equal and connected by an and. For instance, after waiting long and vainly for the
address of a friend who is travelling in Italy, I dream that I receive a telegram which gives me the address. On the telegraph form I see printed in
blue letters: the first word is blurred - perhaps via or villa; the second is distinctly Sezerno, or even (Casa). The second word, which reminds me
of Italian names, and of our discussions on etymology, also expresses my annoyance in respect of the fact that my friend has kept his address a
secret from me; but each of the possible first three words may be recognized on analysis as an independent and equally justifiable starting-point in
the concatenation of ideas.
During the night before the funeral of my father I dreamed of a printed placard, a card or poster rather like the notices in the waiting-rooms of
railway stations which announce that smoking is prohibited. The sign reads either:
You are requested to shut the eyes
or
You are requested to shut one eye
an alternative which I am in the habit of representing in the following form:
- the You are requested to shut eye(s).
- one
Each of the two versions has its special meaning, and leads along particular paths in the dream-interpretation. I had made the simplest possible
funeral arrangements, for I knew what the deceased thought about such matters. Other members of the family, however, did not approve of such
puritanical simplicity; they thought we should feel ashamed in the presence of the other mourners. Hence one of the wordings of the dream asks
for the shutting of one eye, that is to say, it asks that people should show consideration. The significance of the vagueness, which is here
represented by an either-or, is plainly to be seen. The dream-work has not succeeded in concocting a coherent and yet ambiguous wording for the
dream-thoughts. Thus the two principal trains of thought are separated from each other, even in the dream-content.
In some few cases the division of a dream into two equal parts expresses the alternative which the dream finds it so difficult to present.
The attitude of dreams to the category of antithesis and contradiction is very striking. This category is simply ignored; the word No does not seem 
to exist for a dream. Dreams are particularly fond of reducing antitheses to uniformity. or representing them as one and the same thing. Dreams
likewise take the liberty of representing any element whatever by its desired opposite, so that it is at first impossible to tell, in respect of any
element which is capable of having an opposite, whether it is contained in the dream-thoughts in the negative or the positive sense.[13] In one of
the recently cited dreams, whose introductory portion we have already interpreted ("because my origin is so and so"), the dreamer climbs down
over a trellis, and holds a blossoming bough in her hands. Since this picture suggests to her the angel in paintings of the Annunciation (her own
name is Mary) bearing a lily-stem in his hand, and the white-robed girls walking in procession on Corpus Christi Day, when the streets are
decorated with green boughs, the blossoming bough in the dream is quite clearly an allusion to sexual innocence. But the bough is thickly studded
with red blossoms, each of which resembles a camellia. At the end of her walk (so the dream continues) the blossoms are already beginning to
fall; then follow unmistakable allusions to menstruation. But this very bough, which is carried like a lily-stem and as though by an innocent girl,
is also an allusion to Camille, who, as we know, usually wore a white camellia, but a red one during menstruation. The same blossoming bough
("the flower of maidenhood" in Goethe's songs of the miller's daughter) represents at once sexual innocence and its opposite. Moreover, the same
dream, which expresses the dreamer's joy at having succeeded in passing through life unsullied, hints in several places (as in the falling of the
blossom) at the opposite train of thought, namely, that she had been guilty of various sins against sexual purity (that is, in her childhood). In the
analysis of the dream we may clearly distinguish the two trains of thought, of which the comforting one seems to be superficial, and the
reproachful one more profound. The two are diametrically opposed to each other, and their similar yet contrasting elements have been represented
by identical dream-elements.
The mechanism of dream-formation is favourable in the highest degree to only one of the logical relations. This relation is that of similarity,
agreement, contiguity, just as; a relation which may be represented in our dreams, as no other can be, by the most varied expedients. The
screening which occurs in the dream-material, or the cases of just as are the chief points of support for dream-formation, and a not inconsiderable
part of the dream-work consists in creating new screenings of this kind in cases where those that already exist are prevented by the resistance of
the censorship from making their way into the dream. The effort towards condensation evinced by the dream-work facilitates the representation of
a relation of similarity.
Similarity, agreement, community, are quite generally expressed in dreams by contraction into a unity, which is either already found in the dreammaterial or is newly created. The first case may be referred to as identification, the second as composition. Identification is used where the dream
is concerned with persons, composition where things constitute the material to be unified; but compositions are also made of persons. Localities
are often treated as persons.
Identification consists in giving representation in the dream-content to only one of two or more persons who are related by some common feature,
while the second person or other persons appear to be suppressed as far as the dream is concerned. In the dream this one "screening" person entersinto all the relations and situations which derive from the persons whom he screens. In cases of composition, however, when persons are
combined, there are already present in the dream-image features which are characteristic of, but not common to, the persons in question, so that a
new unity, a composite person, appears as the result of the union of these features. The combination itself may be effected in various ways. Either
the dream-person bears the name of one of the persons to whom he refers - and in this case we simply know, in a manner that is quite analogous
to knowledge in waking life, that this or that person is intended - while the visual features belong to another person; or the dream-image itself is
compounded of visual features which in reality are derived from the two. Also, in place of the visual features, the part played by the second
person may be represented by the attitudes and gestures which are usually ascribed to him by the words he speaks, or by the situations in which
he is placed. In this latter method of characterization the sharp distinction between the identification and the combination of persons begins to
disappear. But it may also happen that the formation of such a composite person is unsuccessful. The situations or actions of the dream are then
attributed to one person, and the other - as a rule the more important - is introduced as an inactive spectator. Perhaps the dreamer will say: "My
mother was there too" (Stekel). Such an element of the dream-content is then comparable to a determinative in hieroglyphic script which is not
meant to be expressed, but is intended only to explain another sign.
The common feature which justifies the union of two persons - that is to say, which enables it to be made - may either be represented in the dream
or it may be absent. As a rule, identification or composition of persons actually serves to avoid the necessity of representing this common feature.
Instead of repeating: "A is ill-disposed towards me, and so is B," I make, in my dream, a composite person of A and B; or I conceive A as doing
something which is alien to his character, but which is characteristic of B. The dream-person obtained in this way appears in the dream in some
new connection, and the fact that he signifies both A and B justifies my inserting that which is common to both persons - their hostility towards
me - at the proper place in the dream-interpretation. In this manner I often achieve a quite extraordinary degree of condensation of the dreamcontent; I am able to dispense with the direct representation of the very complicated relations belonging to one person, if I can find a second
person who has an equal claim to some of these relations. It will be readily understood how far this representation by means of identification may
circumvent the censoring resistance which sets up such harsh conditions for the dream-work. The thing that offends the censorship may reside in
those very ideas which are connected in the dream-material with the one person; I now find a second person, who likewise stands in some relation
to the objectionable material, but only to a part of it. Contact at that one point which offends the censorship now justifies my formation of a
composite person, who is characterized by the indifferent features of each. This person, the result of combination or identification, being free of
the censorship, is now suitable for incorporation in the dream-content. Thus, by the application of dream-condensation, I have satisfied the
demands of the dream-censorship.
When a common feature of two persons is represented in a dream, this is usually a hint to look for another concealed common feature, the 
representation of which is made impossible by the censorship. Here a displacement of the common feature has occurred, which in some degree
facilitates representation. From the circumstance that the composite person is shown to me in the dream with an indifferent common feature, I
must infer that another common feature which is by no means indifferent exists in the dream-thoughts.
Accordingly, the identification or combination of persons serves various purposes in our dreams; in the first place, that of representing a feature
common to two persons; secondly, that of representing a displaced common feature; and, thirdly, that of expressly a community of features which
is merely wished for. As the wish for a community of features in two persons often coincides with the interchanging of these persons, this relation
also is expressed in dreams by identification. In the dream of Irma's injection I wish to exchange one patient for another - that is to say, I wish this
other person to be my patient, as the former person has been; the dream deals with this wish by showing me a person who is called Irma, but who
is examined in a position such as I have had occasion to see only the other person occupy. In the dream about my uncle this substitution is made
the centre of the dream; I identify myself with the minister by judging and treating my colleagues as shabbily as lie does.
It has been my experience - and to this I have found no exception - that every dream treats of oneself. Dreams are absolutely egoistic.[14] In cases
where not my ego but only a strange person occurs in the dream-content, I may safely assume that by means of identification my ego is concealed
behind that person. I am permitted to supplement my ego. On other occasions, when my ego appears in the dream, the situation in which it is
placed tells me that another person is concealing himself, by means of identification, behind the ego. In this case I must be prepared to find that in
the interpretation I should transfer something which is connected with this person - the hidden common feature - to myself. There are also dreams
in which my ego appears together with other persons who, when the identification is resolved, once more show themselves to be my ego. Through
these identifications I shall then have to connect with my ego certain ideas to which the censorship has objected. I may also give my ego multiple
representation in my dream, either directly or by means of identification with other people. By means of several such identifications an
extraordinary amount of thought material may be condensed.[15] That one's ego should appear in the same dream several times or in different
forms is fundamentally no more surprising than that it should appear, in conscious thinking, many times and in different places or in different
relations: as, for example, in the sentence: "When I think what a healthy child I was."
Still easier than in the case of persons is the resolution of identifications in the case of localities designated by their own names, as here the
disturbing influence of the all-powerful ego is lacking. In one of my dreams of Rome (chapter V., B.) the name of the place in which I find myself
is Rome: I am surprised, however, by a large number of German placards at a street corner. This last is a wish-fulfilment, which immediately
suggests Prague; the wish itself probably originated at a period of my youth when I was imbued with a German nationalistic spirit which today is
quite subdued. At the time of my dream I was looking forward to meeting a friend in Prague; the identification of Rome with Prague is therefore
explained by a desired common feature; I would rather meet my friend in Rome than in Prague; for the purpose of this meeting I should like to
exchange Prague for Rome.
The possibility of creating composite formations is one of the chief causes of the fantastic character so common in dreams. in that it introduces
into the dream-content elements which could never have been objects of perception. The psychic process which occurs in the creation of
composite formations is obviously the same as that which we employ in conceiving or figuring a dragon or a centaur in our waking senses. The
only difference is that, in the fantastic creations of waking life, the impression intended is itself the decisive factor, while the composite formation
in the dream is determined by a factor - the common feature in the dream-thoughts - which is independent of its form. Composite formations in
dreams may be achieved in a great many different ways. In the most artless of these methods, only the properties of the one thing are represented,
and this representation is accompanied by a knowledge that they refer to another object also. A more careful technique combines features of the
one object with those of the other in a new image, while it makes skillful use of any really existing resemblances between the two objects. The
new creation may prove to be wholly absurd, or even successful as a phantasy, according as the material and the wit employed in constructing it
may permit. If the objects to be condensed into a unity are too incongruous, the dream-work is content with creating a composite formation with a
comparatively distinct nucleus, to which are attached more indefinite modifications. The unification into one image has here been to some extent
unsuccessful; the two representations overlap one another, and give rise to something like a contest between the visual images. Similar
representations might be obtained in a drawing if one were to attempt to give form to a unified abstraction of disparate perceptual images.
Dreams naturally abound in such composite formations; I have given several examples of these in the dreams already analysed, and will now cite
more such examples. In the dream earlier in this chapter which describes the career of my patient in flowery language, the dream-ego carries a
spray of blossoms in her hand which, as we have seen, signifies at once sexual innocence and sexual transgression. Moreover, from the manner in
which the blossoms are set on, they recall cherry-blossom; the blossoms themselves, considered singly, are camellias, and finally the whole spray
gives the dreamer the impression of an exotic plant. The common feature in the elements of this composite formation is revealed by the dreamthoughts. The blossoming spray is made up of allusions to presents by which she was induced or was to have been induced to behave in a manner
agreeable to the giver. So it was with cherries in her childhood, and with a camellia-tree in her later years; the exotic character is an allusion to a
much-travelled naturalist, who sought to win her favour by means of a drawing of a flower. Another female patient contrives a composite mean
out of bathing machines at a seaside resort, country privies, and the attics of our city dwelling-houses. A reference to human nakedness and
exposure is common to the first two elements; and we may infer from their connection with the third element that (in her childhood) the garret
was likewise the scene of bodily exposure. A dreamer of the male sex makes a composite locality out of two places in which "treatment" is given -
my office and the assembly rooms in which he first became acquainted with his wife. Another, a female patient, after her elder brother has
promised to regale her with caviar, dreams that his legs are covered all over with black beads of caviar. The two elements, taint in a moral sense
and the recollection of a cutaneous eruption in childhood which made her legs look as though studded over with red instead of black spots, have 
here combined with the beads of caviar to form a new idea - the idea of what she gets from her brother. In this dream parts of the human body are
treated as objects, as is usually the case in dreams. In one of the dreams recorded by Ferenczi there occurs a composite formation made up of the
person of a physician and a horse, and this composite being wears a night-shirt. The common feature in these three components was revealed in
the analysis, after the nightshirt had been recognized as an allusion to the father of the dreamer in a scene of childhood. In each of the three cases
there was some object of her sexual curiosity. As a child she had often been taken by her nurse to the army stud, where she had the amplest
opportunity to satisfy her curiosity, at that time still uninhibited.
I have already stated that the dream has no means of expressing the relation of contradiction, contrast, negation. I shall now contradict this
assertion for the first time. A certain number of cases of what may be summed up under the word contrast obtain representation, as we have seen,
simply by means of identification - that is when an exchange, a substitution, can be bound up with the contrast. Of this we have cited repeated
examples. Certain other of the contrasts in the dream-thoughts, which perhaps come under the category of inverted, united into the opposite, are
represented in dreams in the following remarkable manner, which may almost be described as witty. The inversion does not itself make its way
into the dream-content, but manifests its presence in the material by the fact that a part of the already formed dream-content which is, for other
reasons, closely connected in context is - as it were subsequently - inverted. It is easier to illustrate this process than to describe it. In the beautiful
"Up and Down" dream (this chapter, A.), the dream-representation of ascending is an inversion of its prototype in the dream-thoughts: that is, of
the introductory scene of Daudet's Sappho; in the dream, climbing is difficult at first and easy later on, whereas, in the novel, it is easy at first, and
later becomes more and more difficult. Again, above and below, with reference to the dreamer's brother, are reversed in the dream. This points to
a relation of inversion or contrast between two parts of the material in the dream-thoughts, which indeed we found in them, for in the childish
phantasy of the dreamer he is carried by his nurse, while in the novel, on the contrary, the hero carries his beloved. My dream of Goethe's attack
on Herr M (to be cited later) likewise contains an inversion of this sort, which must be set right before the dream can be interpreted. In this dream,
Goethe attacks a young man, Herr M; the reality, as contained in the dream-thoughts, is that an eminent man, a friend of mine, has been attacked
by an unknown young author. In the dream I reckon time from the date of Goethe's death; in reality the reckoning was made from the year in
which the paralytic was born. The thought which influences the dream-material reveals itself as my opposition to the treatment of Goethe as
though he were a lunatic. "It is the other way about," says the dream; "if you don't understand the book it is you who are feeble-minded, not the
author." All these dreams of inversion, moreover, seem to me to imply an allusion to the contemptuous phrase, "to turn one's back upon a person"
(German: einem die Kehrseite zeigen, lit. to show a person one's backside): cf. the inversion in respect of the dreamer's brother in the Sappho
dream. It is further worth noting how frequently inversion is employed in precisely those dreams which are inspired by repressed homosexual
impulses.
Moreover, inversion, or transformation into the opposite, is one of the most favoured and most versatile methods of representation which the
dream-work has at its disposal. It serves, in the first place, to enable the wish-fulfilment to prevail against a definite element of the dreamthoughts. "If only it were the other way about!" is often the best expression for the reaction of the ego against a disagreeable recollection. But
inversion becomes extraordinarily useful in the service of the censorship, for it effects, in the material to be represented, a degree of distortion
which at first simply paralyses our understanding of the dream. It is therefore always permissible, if a dream stubbornly refuses to surrender its
meaning, to venture on the experimental inversion of definite portions of its manifest content. Then, not infrequently, everything becomes clear.
Besides the inversion of content, the temporal inversion must not be overlooked. A frequent device of dream-distortion consists in presenting the
final issue of the event or the conclusion of the train of thought at the beginning of the dream, and appending at the end of the dream the premises
of the conclusion, or the causes of the event. Anyone who forgets this technical device of dream-distortion stands helpless before the problem of
dream-interpretation.[16]
In many cases, indeed, we discover the meaning of the dream only when we have subjected the dream-content to a multiple inversion, in
accordance with the different relations. For example, in the dream of a young patient who is suffering from obsessional neurosis, the memory of
the childish death-wish directed against a dreaded father concealed itself behind the following words: His father scolds him because he comes
home so late, but the context of the psycho-analytic treatment and the impressions of the dreamer show that the sentence must be read as follows:
He is angry with his father, and further, that his father always came home too early (i.e., too soon). He would have preferred that his father should
not come home at all, which is identical with the wish (see chapter V., D.) that his father would die. As a little boy, during the prolonged absence
of his father, the dreamer was guilty of a sexual aggression against another child, and was punished by the threat: "Just you wait until your father
comes home!"
If we should seek to trace the relations between the dream-content and the dream-thoughts a little farther, we shall do this best by making the
dream itself our point of departure, and asking ourselves: What do certain formal characteristics of the dream-presentation signify in relation to
the dream-thoughts? First and foremost among the formal characteristics which are bound to impress us in dreams are the differences in the
sensory intensity of the single dream-images, and in the distinctness of various parts of the dream, or of whole dreams as compared with one
another. The differences in the intensity of individual dream-images cover the whole gamut, from a sharpness of definition which one is inclined -
although without warrant - to rate more highly than that of reality, to a provoking indistinctness which we declare to be characteristic of dreams,
because it really is not wholly comparable to any of the degrees of indistinctness which we occasionally perceive in real objects. Moreover, we
usually describe the impression which we receive of an indistinct object in a dream as fleeting, while we think of the more distinct dream-images
as having been perceptible also for a longer period of time. We must now ask ourselves by what conditions in the dream-material these
differences in the distinctness of the individual portions of the dream-content are brought about. 
Before proceeding farther, it is necessary to deal with certain expectations which seem to be almost inevitable. Since actual sensations
experienced during sleep may constitute part of the dream-material, it will probably be assumed that these sensations, or the dream-elements
resulting from them, are emphasized by a special intensity, or conversely, that anything which is particularly vivid in the dream can probably be
traced to such real sensations during sleep. My experience, however, has never confirmed this. It is not true that those elements of a dream which
are derivatives of real impressions perceived in sleep (nerve stimuli) are distinguished by their special vividness from others which are based on
memories. The factor of reality is inoperative in determining the intensity of dream-images.
Further, it might be expected that the sensory intensity (vividness) of single dream-images is in proportion to the psychic intensity of the elements
corresponding to them in the dream-thoughts. In the latter, intensity is identical with psychic value; the most intense elements are in fact the most
significant, and these constitute the central point of the dream-thoughts. We know, however, that it is precisely these elements which are usually
not admitted to the dream-content, owing to the vigilance of the censorship. Still, it might be possible for their most immediate derivatives, which
represent them in the dream, to reach a higher degree of intensity without, however, for that reason constituting the central point of the dreamrepresentation. This assumption also vanishes as soon as we compare the dream and the dream-material. The intensity of the elements in the one
has nothing to do with the intensity of the elements in the other; as a matter of fact, a complete transvaluation of all psychic values takes place
between the dream-material and the dream. The very element of the dream which is transient and hazy, and screened by more vigorous images, is
often discovered to be the one and only direct derivative of the topic that completely dominates the dream-thoughts.
The intensity of the dream-elements proves to be determined in a different manner: that is, by two factors which are mutually independent. It will
readily be understood that, those elements by means of which the wish-fulfilment expresses itself are those which are intensely represented. But
analysis tells us that from the most vivid elements of the dream the greatest number of trains of thought proceed, and that those which are most
vivid are at the same time those which are best determined. No change of meaning is involved if we express this latter empirical proposition in the
following formula: The greatest intensity is shown by those elements of the dream for whose formation the most extensive condensation-work
was required. We may, therefore, expect that it will be possible to express this condition, as well as the other condition of the wish-fulfilment, in a
single formula.
I must utter a warning that the problem which I have just been considering - the causes of the greater or lesser intensity or distinctness of single
elements in dreams - is not to be confounded with the other problem - that of variations in the distinctness of whole dreams or sections of dreams.
In the former case the opposite of distinctness is haziness; in the latter, confusion. It is, of course, undeniable that in both scales the two kinds of
intensities rise and fall in unison. A portion of the dream which seems clear to us usually contains vivid elements; an obscure dream, on the
contrary, is composed of less vivid elements. But the problem offered by the scale of definition, which ranges from the apparently clear to the
indistinct or confused, is far more complicated than the problem of fluctuations in vividness of the dream-elements. For reasons which will be
given later, the former cannot at this stage be further discussed. In isolated cases one observes, not without surprise, that the impression of
distinctness or indistinctness produced by a dream has nothing to do with the dream-structure, but proceeds from the dream-material, as one of its
ingredients. Thus, for example, I remember a dream which on waking seemed so particularly well-constructed, flawless and clear that I made up
my mind, while I was still in a somnolent state, to admit a new category of dreams - those which had not been subject to the mechanism of
condensation and distortion, and which might thus be described as phantasies during sleep. A closer examination, however, proved that this
unusual dream suffered from the same structural flaws and breaches as exist in all other dreams; so I abandoned the idea of a category of dreamphantasies.[17] The content of the dream, reduced to its lowest terms, was that I was expounding to a friend a difficult and long-sought theory of
bisexuality, and the wish-fulfilling power of the dream was responsible for the fact that this theory (which, by the way, was not communicated in
the dream) appeared to be so lucid and flawless. Thus, what I believed to be a judgment as regards the finished dream was a part, and indeed the
most essential part, of the dream-content. Here the dream-work reached out, as it were, into my first waking thoughts, and presented to me, in the
form of a judgment of the dream, that part of the dream-material which it had failed to represent with precision in the dream. I was once
confronted with the exact counterpart of this case by a female patient who at first absolutely declined to relate a dream which was necessary for
the analysis "because it was so hazy and confused," and who finally declared, after repeatedly protesting the inaccuracy of her description, that it
seemed to her that several persons - herself, her husband, and her father - had occurred in the dream, and that she had not known whether her
husband was her father, or who really was her father, or something of that sort. Comparison of this dream with the ideas which occurred to the
dreamer in the course of the sitting showed beyond a doubt that it dealt with the rather commonplace story of a maidservant who has to confess
that she is expecting a child, and hears doubts expressed as to "who the father really is."[18] The obscurity manifested by this dream, therefore,
was once more a portion of the dream-exciting material. A fragment of this material was represented in the form of the dream. The form of the
dream or of dreaming is employed with astonishing frequency to represent the concealed content.
Glosses on the dream, and seemingly harmless comments on it, often serve in the most subtle manner to conceal - although, of course, they really
betray - a part of what is dreamed. As, for example, when the dreamer says: Here the dream was wiped out, and the analysis gives an infantile
reminiscence of listening to someone cleaning himself after defecation. Or another example, which deserves to be recorded in detail: A young
man has a very distinct dream, reminding him of phantasies of his boyhood which have remained conscious. He found himself in a hotel at a
seasonal resort; it was night; he mistook the number of his room, and entered a room in which an elderly lady and her two daughters were
undressing to go to bed. He continues: "Then there are some gaps in the dream; something is missing; and at the end there was a man in the room,
who wanted to throw me out, and with whom I had to struggle." He tries in vain to recall the content and intention of the boyish phantasy to
which the dream obviously alluded. But we finally become aware that the required content had already been given in his remarks concerning the 
indistinct part of the dream. The gaps are the genital apertures of the women who are going to bed: Here something is missing describes the
principal characteristic of the female genitals. In his young days he burned with curiosity to see the female genitals, and was still inclined to
adhere to the infantile sexual theory which attributes a male organ to women.
A very similar form was assumed in an analogous reminiscence of another dreamer. He dreamed: I go with Fraulein K into the restaurant of the
Volksgarten... then comes a dark place, an interruption... then I find myself in the salon of a brothel, where I see two or three women, one in a
chemise and drawers.
Analysis. Fraulein K is the daughter of his former employer; as he himself admits, she was a sister-substitute. He rarely had the opportunity of
talking to her, but they once had a conversation in which "one recognized one's sexuality, so to speak, as though one were to say: I am a man and
you are a woman." He had been only once to the above-mentioned restaurant, when he was accompanied by the sister of his brother-in-law, a girl
to whom he was quite indifferent. On another occasion he accompanied three ladies to the door of the restaurant. The ladies were his sister, his
sister-in-law, and the girl already mentioned. He was perfectly indifferent to all three of them, but they all belonged to the sister category. He had
visited a brothel but rarely, perhaps two or three times in his life.
The interpretation is based on the dark place, the interruption in the dream, and informs us that on occasion, but in fact only rarely, obsessed by
his boyish curiosity, he had inspected the genitals of his sister, a few years his junior. A few days later the misdemeanor indicated in the dream
recurred to his conscious memory.
All dreams of the same night belong, in respect of their content, to the same whole; their division into several parts, their grouping and number,
are all full of meaning and may be regarded as pieces of information about the latent dream-thoughts. In the interpretation of dreams consisting of
several main sections, or of dreams belonging to the same night, we must not overlook the possibility that these different and successive dreams
mean the same thing, expressing the same impulses in different material. That one of these homologous dreams which comes first in time is
usually the most distorted and most bashful, while the next dream is bolder and more distinct.
Even Pharaoh's dream of the ears and the kine, which Joseph interpreted, was of this kind. It is given by Josephus in greater detail than in the
Bible. After relating the first dream, the King said: "After I had seen this vision I awaked out of my sleep, and, being in disorder, and considering
with myself what this appearance should be, I fell asleep again, and saw another dream much more wonderful than the foregoing, which still did
more affright and disturb me." After listening to the relation of the dream, Joseph said: "This dream, O King, although seen under two forms,
signifies one and the same event of things."[19]
Jung, in his Beitrag zur Psychologie des Geruchtes, relates how a veiled erotic dream of a schoolgirl was understood by her friends without
interpretation, and continued by them with variations, and he remarks, with reference to one of these narrated dreams, that "the concluding idea of
a long series of dream-images had precisely the same content as the first image of the series had endeavoured to represent. The censorship thrust
the complex out of the way as long as possible by a constant renewal of symbolic screenings, displacements, transformations into something
harmless, etc." Scherner was well acquainted with this peculiarity of dream-representation, and describes it in his Leben des Traumes (p. 166) in
terms of a special law in the Appendix to his doctrine of organic stimulation: "But finally, in all symbolic dream-formations emanating from
definite nerve stimuli, the phantasy observes the general law that at the beginning of the dream it depicts the stimulating object only by the
remotest and freest allusions, but towards the end, when the graphic impulse becomes exhausted, the stimulus itself is nakedly represented by its
appropriate organ or its function; whereupon the dream, itself describing its organic motive, achieves its end...."
A pretty confirmation of this law of Scherner's has been furnished by Otto Rank in his essay: Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet. This dream,
related to him by a girl, consisted of two dreams of the same night, separated by an interval of time, the second of which ended with an orgasm. It
was possible to interpret this orgastic dream in detail in spite of the few ideas contributed by the dreamer, and the wealth of relations between the
two dream-contents made it possible to recognize that the first dream expressed in modest language the same thing as the second, so that the latter
- the orgastic dream - facilitated a full explanation of the former. From this example, Rank very justifiably argues the significance of orgastic
dreams for the theory of dreams in general.
But, in my experience, it is only in rare cases that one is in a position to translate the lucidity or confusion of a dream, respectively, into a
certainty or doubt in the dream-material. Later on I shall have to disclose a hitherto unmentioned factor in dream-formation, upon whose
operation this qualitative scale in dreams is essentially dependent.
In many dreams in which a certain situation and environment are preserved for some time, there occur interruptions which may be described in
the following words: "But then it seemed as though it were, at the same time, another place, and there such and such a thing happened." In these
cases, what interrupts the main action of the dream, which after a while may be continued again, reveals itself in the dream-material as a
subordinate clause, an interpolated thought. Conditionality in the dream-thoughts is represented by simultaneity in the dream-content (wenn or
wann = if or when, while).
We may now ask: What is the meaning of the sensation of inhibited movement which so often occurs in dreams, and is so closely allied to 
anxiety? One wants to move, and is unable to stir from the spot; or wants to accomplish something, and encounters obstacle after obstacle. The
train is about to start. and one cannot reach it; one's hand is raised to avenge an insult, and its strength fails, etc. We have already met with this
sensation in exhibition-dreams, but have as yet made no serious attempt to interpret it. It is convenient, but inadequate, to answer that there is
motor paralysis in sleep, which manifests itself by means of the sensation alluded to. We may ask: Why is it, then, that we do not dream
continually of such inhibited movements? And we may permissibly suspect that this sensation, which may at any time occur during sleep, serves
some sort of purpose for representation, and is evoked only when the need of this representation is present in the dream-material.
Inability to do a thing does not always appear in the dream as a sensation; it may appear simply as part of the dream-content. I think one case of
this kind is especially fitted to enlighten us as to the meaning of this peculiarity. I shall give an abridged version of a dream in which I seem to be
accused of dishonesty. The scene is a mixture made up of a private sanatorium and several other places. A manservant appears, to summon me to
an inquiry. I know in the dream that something has been missed, and that the inquiry is taking place because I am suspected of having
appropriated the lost article. Analysis shows that inquiry is to be taken in two senses; it includes the meaning of medical examination. Being
conscious of my innocence, and my position as consultant in this sanatorium, I calmly follow the manservant. We are received at the door by
another manservant, who says, pointing at me, "Have you brought him? Why, he is a respectable man." Thereupon, and unattended, I enter a great
hall where there are many machines, which reminds me of an inferno with its hellish instruments of punishment. I see a colleague strapped to an
appliance; he has every reason to be interested in my appearance, but he takes no notice of me. I understand that I may now go. Then I cannot find
my hat, and cannot go after all.
The wish that the dream fulfils is obviously the wish that my honesty shall be acknowledged, and that I may be permitted to go; there must
therefore be all sorts of material in the dream-thoughts which comprise a contradiction of this wish. The fact that I may go is the sign of my
absolution; if, then, the dream provides at its close an event which prevents me from going, we may readily conclude that the suppressed material
of the contradiction is asserting itself in this feature. The fact that I cannot find my hat therefore means: "You are not after all an honest man."
The inability to do something in the dream is the expression of a contradiction, a No; so that our earlier assertion, to the effect that the dream is
not capable of expressing a negation, must be revised accordingly.[20]
In other dreams in which the inability to do something occurs, not merely as a situation, but also as a sensation, the same contradiction is more
emphatically expressed by the sensation of inhibited movement, or a will to which a counter-will is opposed. Thus the sensation of inhibited
movement represents a conflict of will. We shall see later on that this very motor paralysis during sleep is one of the fundamental conditions of
the psychic process which functions during dreaming. Now an impulse which is conveyed to the motor system is none other than the will, and the
fact that we are certain that the impulse will be inhibited in sleep makes the whole process extraordinarily well-adapted to the representation of a
will towards something and of a No which opposes itself thereto. From my explanation of anxiety, it is easy to understand why the sensation of
the inhibited will is so closely allied to anxiety, and why it is so often connected with it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal impulse which emanates
from the unconscious and is inhibited by the preconscious.[21] Therefore, when a sensation of inhibition in the dream is accompanied by anxiety,
the dream must be concerned with a volition which was at one time capable of arousing libido; there must be a sexual impulse.
As for the judgment which is often expressed during a dream: "Of course, it is only a dream," and the psychic force to which it may be ascribed, I
shall discuss these questions later on. For the present I will merely say that they are intended to depreciate the importance of what is being
dreamed. The interesting problem allied to this, as to what is meant if a certain content in the dream is characterized in the dream itself as having
been dreamed - the riddle of a dream within a dream - has been solved in a similar sense by W. Stekel, by the analysis of some convincing
examples. Here again the part of the dream dreamed is to be depreciated in value and robbed of its reality; that which the dreamer continues to
dream after waking from the dream within a dream is what the dream-wish desires to put in place of the obliterated reality. It may therefore be
assumed that the part dreamed contains the representation of the reality, the real memory, while, on the other hand, the continued dream contains
the representation of what the dreamer merely wishes. The inclusion of a certain content in a dream within a dream is, therefore, equivalent to the
wish that what has been characterized as a dream had never occurred. In other words: when a particular incident is represented by the dream-workin a dream, it signifies the strongest confirmation of the reality of this incident, the most emphatic affirmation of it. The dream-work utilizes the
dream itself as a form of repudiation, and thereby confirms the theory that a dream is a wish-fulfilment.
D. Regard for Representability
We have hitherto been concerned with investigating the manner in which our dreams represent the relations between the dream-thoughts, but we
have often extended our inquiry to the further question as to what alterations the dream-material itself undergoes for the purposes of dreamformation. We now know that the dream-material, after being stripped of a great many of its relations, is subjected to compression, while at the
same time displacements of the intensity of its elements enforce a psychic transvaluation of this material. The displacements which we have
considered were shown to be substitutions of one particular idea for another, in some way related to the original by its associations, and the
displacements were made to facilitate the condensation, inasmuch as in this manner, instead of two elements, a common mean between them
found its way into the dream. So far, no mention has been made of any other kind of displacement. But we learn from the analyses that
displacement of another kind does occur, and that it manifests itself in an exchange of the verbal expression for the thought in question. In both
cases we are dealing with a displacement along a chain of associations, but the same process takes place in different psychic spheres, and the
result of this displacement in the one case is that one element is replaced by another, while in the other case an element exchanges its verbal shape 
for another.
This second kind of displacement occurring in dream-formation is not only of great theoretical interest, but also peculiarly well-fitted to explain
the appearance of phantastic absurdity in which dreams disguise themselves. Displacement usually occurs in such a way that a colourless and
abstract expression of the dream-thought is exchanged for one that is pictorial and concrete. The advantage, and along with it the purpose, of this
substitution is obvious. Whatever is pictorial is capable of representation in dreams and can be fitted into a situation in which abstract expression
would confront the dream-representation with difficulties not unlike those which would arise if a political leading article had to be represented in
an illustrated journal. Not only the possibility of representation, but also the interests of condensation and of the censorship, may be furthered by
this exchange. Once the abstractly expressed and unserviceable dream-thought is translated into pictorial language, those contacts and identities
between this new expression and the rest of the dream-material which are required by the dream-work, and which it contrives whenever they are
not available, are more readily provided, since in every language concrete terms, owing to their evolution, are richer in associations than are
abstract terms. It may be imagined that a good part of the intermediate work in dream-formation, which seeks to reduce the separate dreamthoughts to the tersest and most unified expression in the dream, is effected in this manner, by fitting paraphrases of the various thoughts. The one
thought whose mode of expression has perhaps been determined by other factors will therewith exert a distributive and selective influence on the
expressions available for the others, and it may even do this from the very start, just as it would in the creative activity of a poet. When a poem is
to be written in rhymed couplets, the second rhyming line is bound by two conditions: it must express the meaning allotted to it, and its
expression must permit of a rhyme with the first line. The best poems are, of course, those in which one does not detect the effort to find a rhyme,
and in which both thoughts have as a matter of course, by mutual induction, selected the verbal expression which, with a little subsequent
adjustment, will permit of the rhyme.
In some cases the change of expression serves the purposes of dream-condensation more directly, in that it provides an arrangement of words
which, being ambiguous, permits of the expression of more than one of the dream-thoughts. The whole range of verbal wit is thus made to serve
the purpose of the dream-work. The part played by words in dream-formation ought not to surprise us. A word, as the point of junction of a
number of ideas, possesses, as it were, a predestined ambiguity, and the neuroses (obsessions, phobias) take advantage of the opportunities for
condensation and disguise afforded by words quite as eagerly as do dreams.[22] That dream-distortion also profits by this displacement of
expression may be readily demonstrated. It is indeed confusing if one ambiguous word is substituted for two with single meanings, and the
replacement of sober, everyday language by a plastic mode of expression baffles our understanding, especially since a dream never tells us
whether the elements presented by it are to be interpreted literally or metaphorically, whether they refer to the dream-material directly, or only by
means of interpolated expressions. Generally speaking, in the interpretation of any element of a dream it is doubtful whether it
(a) is to be accepted in the negative or the positive sense (contrast relation);
(b) is to be interpreted historically (as a memory);
(c) is symbolic; or whether
(d) its valuation is to be based upon its wording. - In spite of this versatility, we may say that the representation effected by the dream-work,
which was never even intended to be understood, does not impose upon the translator any greater difficulties than those that the ancient writers of
hieroglyphics imposed upon their readers.
I have already given several examples of dream-representations which are held together only by ambiguity of expression (her mouth opens
without difficulty, in the dream of Irma's injection; I cannot go yet after all, in the last dream related, etc.) I shall now cite a dream in the analysis
of which plastic representation of the abstract thoughts plays a greater part. The difference between such dream-interpretation and the
interpretation by means of symbols may nevertheless be clearly defined; in the symbolic interpretation of dreams, the key to the symbolism is
selected arbitrarily by the interpreter, while in our own cases of verbal disguise these keys are universally known and are taken from established
modes of speech. Provided one hits on the right idea on the right occasion, one may solve dreams of this kind, either completely or in part,
independently of any statements made by the dreamer.
A lady friend of mine, dreams: She is at the opera. It is a Wagnerian performance, which has lasted until 7.45 in the morning. In the stalls and pit
there are tables, at which people are eating and drinking. Her cousin and his young wife, who have just returned from their honeymoon, are sitting
at one of these tables; beside them is a member of the aristocracy. The young wife is said to have brought him back with her from the honeymoon
quite openly, just as she might have brought back a hat. In the middle of the stalls there is a high tower, on the top of which there is a platform
surrounded by an iron railing. There, high overhead, stands the conductor, with the features of Hans Richter, continually running round behind the
railing, perspiring terribly; and from this position he is conducting the orchestra, which is arranged round the base of the tower. She herself is
sitting in a box with a friend of her own sex (known to me). Her younger sister tries to hand her up, from the stalls, a large lump of coal, alleging
that she had not known that it would be so long, and that she must by this time be miserably cold. (As though the boxes ought to have been heated
during the long performance.)
Although in other respects the dream gives a good picture of the situation, it is, of course, nonsensical enough: the tower in the middle of the 
stalls, from which the conductor leads the orchestra, and above all the coal which her sister hands up to her. I purposely asked for no analysis of
this dream. With some knowledge of the personal relations of the dreamer, I was able to interpret parts of it independently of her. I knew that she
had felt intense sympathy for a musician whose career had been prematurely brought to an end by insanity. I therefore decided to take the tower
in the stalls verbally. It then emerged that the man whom she wished to see in the place of Hans Richter towered above all the other members of
the orchestra. This tower must be described as a composite formation by means of apposition; by its substructure it represents the greatness of the
man, but by the railing at the top, behind which he runs round like a prisoner or an animal in a cage (an allusion to the name of the unfortunate
man),[23] it represents his later fate. Lunatic-tower is perhaps the expression in which the two thoughts might have met.
Now that we have discovered the dream's method of representation, we may try, with the same key, to unlock the meaning of the second apparent
absurdity, that of the coal which her sister hands up to the dreamer. Coal should mean secret love.
No fire, no coal so hotly glows
As the secret love of which no one knows.
She and her friend remain seated[24] while her younger sister, who still has a prospect of marrying, hands her up the coal because she did not
know that it would be so long. What would be so long is not told in the dream. If it were an anecdote, we should say the performance; but in the
dream we may consider the sentence as it is, declare it to be ambiguous, and add before she married. The interpretation secret love is then
confirmed by the mention of the cousin who is sitting with his wife in the stalls, and by the open love-affair attributed to the latter. The contrasts
between secret and open love, between the dreamer's fire and the coldness of the young wife, dominate the dream. Moreover, here once again
there is a person in a high position as a middle term between the aristocrat and the musician who is justified in raising high hopes.
In the above analysis we have at last brought to light a third factor, whose part in the transformation of the dream-thoughts into the dream-content
is by no means trivial: namely, consideration of the suitability of the dream-thoughts for representation in the particular psychic material of which
the dream makes use - that is, for the most part in visual images. Among the various subordinate ideas associated with the essential dreamthoughts, those will be preferred which permit of visual representation, and the dream-work does not hesitate to recast the intractable thoughts
into an: other verbal form, even though this is a more unusual form provided it makes representation possible, and thus puts an end to the
psychological distress caused by strangulated thinking. This pouring of the thought-content into another mould may at the same time serve the
work of condensation, and may establish relations with another thought which otherwise would not have been established. It is even possible that
this second thought may itself have previously changed its original expression for the purpose of meeting the first one halfway.
Herbert Silberer[25] has described a good method of directly observing the transformation of thoughts into images which occurs in dreamformation, and has thus made it possible to study in isolation this one factor of the dream-work. If, while in a state of fatigue and somnolence, he
imposed upon himself a mental effort, it frequently happened that the thought escaped him and in its place there appeared a picture in which he
could recognize the substitute for the thought. Not quite appropriately, Silberer described this substitution as auto-symbolic. I shall cite here a few
examples from Silberer's work, and on account of certain peculiarities of the phenomena observed I shall refer to the subject later on.
"Example 1. I remember that I have to correct a halting passage in an essay.
"Symbol. I see myself planing a piece of wood.
"Example 5. I endeavour to call to mind the aim of certain metaphysical studies which I am proposing to undertake.
"This aim, I reflect, consists in working one's way through, while seeking for the basis of existence, to ever higher forms of consciousness or
levels of being.
"Symbol. I run a long knife under a cake as though to take a slice out of it.
"Interpretation. My movement with the knife signifies working one's way through... The explanation of the basis of the symbolism is as follows:
At table it devolves upon me now and again to cut and distribute a cake, a business which I perform with a long, flexible knife, and which
necessitates a certain amount of care. In particular, the neat extraction of the cut slices of cake presents a certain amount of difficulty; the knife
must be carefully pushed under the slices in question (the slow working one's way through in order to get to the bottom). But there is yet more
symbolism in the picture. The cake of the symbol was really a dobos-cake - that is, a cake in which the knife has to cut through several layers (the
levels of consciousness and thought).
"Example 9. I lost the thread in a train of thought. I make an effort to find it again, but I have to recognize that the point of departure has
completely escaped me. 
"Symbol. Part of a form of type, the last lines of which have fallen out."
In view of the part played by witticisms, puns, quotations, songs, and proverbs in the intellectual life of educated persons, it would be entirely in
accordance with our expectations to find disguises of this sort used with extreme frequency in the representation of the dream-thoughts. Only in
the case of a few types of material has a generally valid dream-symbolism established itself on the basis of generally known allusions and verbal
equivalents. A good part of this symbolism, however, is common to the psychoneuroses, legends, and popular usages as well as to dreams.
In fact, if we look more closely into the matter, we must recognize that in employing this kind of substitution the dream-work is doing nothing at
all original. For the achievement of its purpose, which in this case is representation without interference from the censorship, it simply follows the
paths which it finds already marked out in unconscious thinking, and gives the preference to those transformations of the repressed material
which are permitted to become conscious also in the form of witticisms and allusions, and with which all the phantasies of neurotics are replete.
Here we suddenly begin to understand the dream-interpretations of Scherner, whose essential correctness I have vindicated elsewhere. The
preoccupation of the imagination with one's own body is by no means peculiar to or characteristic of the dream alone. My analyses have shown
me that it is constantly found in the unconscious thinking of neurotics, and may be traced back to sexual curiosity, whose object, in the adolescent
youth or maiden, is the genitals of the opposite sex, or even of the same sex. But, as Scherner and Volkelt very truly insist, the house does not
constitute the only group of ideas which is employed for the symbolization of the body, either in dreams or in the unconscious phantasies of
neurosis. To be sure, I know patients who have steadily adhered to an architectural symbolism for the body and the genitals (sexual interest, of
course, extends far beyond the region of the external genital organs) - patients for whom posts and pillars signify legs (as in the Song of Songs),
to whom every door suggests a bodily aperture (hole), and every water-pipe the urinary system, and so on. But the groups of ideas appertaining to
plant-life. or to the kitchen, are just as often chosen to conceal sexual images;[26] in respect of the former everyday language, the sediment of
imaginative comparisons dating from the remotest times, has abundantly paved the way (the vineyard of the Lord, the seed of Abraham, the
garden of the maiden in the Song of Songs). The ugliest as well as the most intimate details of sexual life may be thought or dreamed of in
apparently innocent allusions to culinary operations, and the symptoms of hysteria will become absolutely unintelligible if we forget that sexual
symbolism may conceal itself behind the most commonplace and inconspicuous matters as its safest hiding-place. That some neurotic children
cannot look at blood and raw meat, that they vomit at the sight of eggs and macaroni, and that the dread of snakes, which is natural to mankind, is
monstrously exaggerated in neurotics - all this has a definite sexual meaning. Wherever the neurosis employs a disguise of this sort, it treads the
paths once trodden by the whole of humanity in the early stages of civilization - paths to whose thinly veiled existence our idiomatic expressions,
proverbs, superstitions, and customs testify to this day.
I here insert the promised flower-dream of a female patient, in which I shall print in Roman type everything which is to be sexually interpreted.
This beautiful dream lost all its charm for the dreamer once it had been interpreted.
(a) Preliminary dream: She goes to the two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare a little bite of food. She also sees a
very large number of heavy kitchen utensils in the kitchen, heaped into piles and turned upside down in order to drain. Later addition: The two
maids go to fetch water, and have, as it were, to climb into a river which reaches up to the house or into the courtyard.[27]
(b) Main dream:[28] She is descending from a height[29] over curiously constructed railings, or a fence which is composed of large square trelliswork hurdles with small square apertures.[30] It is really not adapted for climbing; she is constantly afraid that she cannot find a place for her
foot, and she is glad that her dress doesn't get caught anywhere, and that she is able to climb it so respectably.[31] As she climbs she is carrying a
big branch in her hand,[32] really like a tree, which is thickly studded with red flowers; a spreading branch, with many twigs.[33] With this is
connected the idea of cherry-blossoms (Bluten = flowers), but they look like fully opened camellias, which of course do not grow on trees. As she
is descending, she first has one, then suddenly two, and then again only one.[34] When she has reached the ground the lower flowers have already
begun to fall. Now that she has reached the bottom she sees an "odd man" who is combing - as she would like to put it - just such a tree, that is,
with a piece of wood he is scraping thick bunches of hair from it, which hang from it like moss. Other men have chopped off such branches in a
garden, and have flung them into the road, where they are lying about, so that a number of people take some of them. But she asks whether this is
right, whether she may take one, too.[35] In the garden there stands a young man (he is a foreigner, and known to her) toward whom she goes in
order to ask him how it is possible to transplant such branches in her own garden.[36] He embraces her, whereupon she struggles and asks him
what he is thinking of, whether it is permissible to embrace her in such a manner. He says there is nothing wrong in it, that it is permitted.[37] He
then declares himself willing to go with her into the other garden, in order to show her how to put them in, and he says something to her which
she does not quite understand: "Besides this I need three metres (later she says: square metres) or three fathoms of ground." It seems as though he
were asking her for something in return for his willingness, as though he had the intention of indemnifying (reimbursing) himself in her garden,
as though he wanted to evade some law or other, to derive some advantage from it without causing her an injury. She does not know whether or
not he really shows her anything.
The above dream, which has been given prominence on account of its symbolic elements, may be described as a biographical dream. Such dreams
occur frequently in psychoanalysis, but perhaps only rarely outside it.[38]
I have, of course, an abundance of such material, but to reproduce it here would lead us too far into the consideration of neurotic conditions. 
Everything points to the same conclusion, namely, that we need not assume that any special symbolizing activity of the psyche is operative in
dream-formation; that, on the contrary, the dream makes use of such symbolizations as are to be found ready-made in unconscious thinking, since
these, by reason of their case of representation, and for the most part by reason of their being exempt from the censorship, satisfy more effectively
the requirements of dream-formation.
The analysis of the last biographical dream shows that I recognized the symbolism in dreams from the very outset. But it was only little by little
that I arrived at a full appreciation of its extent and significance, as the result of increasing experience, and under the influence of the works of W.
Stekel, concerning which I may here fittingly say something.
This author, who has perhaps injured psychoanalysis as much as he has benefited it, produced a large number of novel symbolic translations, to
which no credence was given at first, but most of which were later confirmed and had to be accepted. Stekel's services are in no way belittled by
the remark that the sceptical reserve with which these symbols were received was not unjustified. For the examples upon which he based his
interpretations were often unconvincing, and, moreover, he employed a method which must be rejected as scientifically unreliable. Stekel found
his symbolic meanings by way of intuition, by virtue of his individual faculty of immediately understanding the symbols. But such an art cannot
be generally assumed; its efficiency is immune from criticism, and its results have therefore no claim to credibility. It is as though one were to
base one's diagnosis of infectious diseases on the olfactory impressions received beside the sick-bed, although of course there have been
clinicians to whom the sense of smell - atrophied in most people - has been of greater service than to others, and who really have been able to
diagnose a case of abdominal typhus by their sense of smell.
The progressive experience of psycho-analysis has enabled us to discover patients who have displayed in a surprising degree this immediate
understanding of dream-symbolism. Many of these patients suffered from dementia praecox, so that for a time there was an inclination to suspect
that all dreamers with such an understanding of symbols were suffering from that disorder. But this did not prove to be the case; it is simply a
question of a personal gift or idiosyncrasy without perceptible pathological significance.
When one has familiarized oneself with the extensive employment of symbolism for the representation of sexual material in dreams, one naturally
asks oneself whether many of these symbols have not a permanently established meaning, like the signs in shorthand; and one even thinks of
attempting to compile a new dream-book on the lines of the cipher method. In this connection it should be noted that symbolism does not
appertain especially to dreams, but rather to the unconscious imagination, and particularly to that of the people, and it is to be found in a more
developed condition in folklore, myths, legends, idiomatic phrases, proverbs, and the current witticisms of a people than in dreams. We should
have, therefore, to go far beyond the province of dream-interpretation in order fully to investigate the meaning of symbolism, and to discuss the
numerous problems - for the most part still unsolved - which are associated with the concept of the symbol.[39] We shall here confine ourselves
to saying that representation by a symbol comes under the heading of the indirect representations, but that we are warned by all sorts of signs
against indiscriminately classing symbolic representation with the other modes of indirect representation before we have clearly conceived its
distinguishing characteristics. In a number of cases, the common quality shared by the symbol and the thing which it represents is obvious; in
others, it is concealed; in these latter cases the choice of the symbol appears to be enigmatic. And these are the very cases that must be able to
elucidate the ultimate meaning of the symbolic relation; they point to the fact that it is of a genetic nature. What is today symbolically connected
was probably united, in primitive times, by conceptual and linguistic identity.[40] The symbolic relationship seems to be a residue and reminder
of a former identity. It may also be noted that in many cases the symbolic identity extends beyond the linguistic identity, as had already been
asserted by Schubert (1814).[41] -
Dreams employ this symbolism to give a disguised representation to their latent thoughts. Among the symbols thus employed there are, of course,
many which constantly, or all but constantly, mean the same thing. But we must bear in mind the curious plasticity of psychic material. Often
enough a symbol in the dream-content may have to be interpreted not symbolically but in accordance with its proper meaning; at other times the
dreamer, having to deal with special memory-material, may take the law into his own hands and employ anything whatever as a sexual symbol,
though it is not generally so employed. Wherever he has the choice of several symbols for the representation of a dream-content, he will decide in
favour of that symbol which is in addition objectively related to his other thought-material; that is to say, he will employ an individual motivation
besides the typically valid one.
Although since Scherner's time the more recent investigations of dream-problems have definitely established the existence of dream-symbolism -
even Havelock Ellis acknowledges that our dreams are indubitably full of symbols - it must yet be admitted that the existence of symbols in
dreams has not only facilitated dream-interpretation, but has also made it more difficult. The technique of interpretation in accordance with the
dreamer's free associations more often than otherwise leaves us in the lurch as far as the symbolic elements of the dream-content are concerned. A
return to the arbitrariness of dream-interpretation as it was practised in antiquity, and is seemingly revived by Stekel's wild interpretations, is
contrary to scientific method. Consequently, those elements in the dream-content which are to be symbolically regarded compel us to employ a
combined technique, which on the one hand is based on the dreamer's associations, while on the other hand the missing portions have to be
supplied by the interpreter's understanding of the symbols. Critical circumspection in the solution of the symbols must coincide with careful study
of the symbols in especially transparent examples of dreams in order to silence the reproach of arbitrariness in dream-interpretation. The 
uncertainties which still adhere to our function as dream-interpreters are due partly to our imperfect knowledge (which, however, can be
progressively increased) and partly to certain peculiarities of the dream-symbols themselves. These often possess many and varied meanings, so
that, as in Chinese script, only the context can furnish the correct meaning. This multiple significance of the symbol is allied to the dream's
faculty of admitting over-interpretations, of representing, in the same content, various wish-impulses and thought-formations, often of a widely
divergent character.
After these limitations and reservations, I will proceed. The Emperor and the Empress (King and Queen)[42] in most cases really represent the
dreamer's parents; the dreamer himself or herself is the prince or princess. But the high authority conceded to the Emperor is also conceded to
great men, so that in some dreams, for example, Goethe appears as a father symbol (Hitschmann). - All elongated objects, sticks, tree-trunks,
umbrellas (on account of the opening, which might be likened to an erection), all sharp and elongated weapons, knives, daggers, and pikes,
represent the male member. A frequent, but not very intelligible symbol for the same is a nail-file (a reference to rubbing and scraping?). - Small
boxes, chests, cupboards, and ovens correspond to the female organ; also cavities, ships, and all kinds of vessels. - A room in a dream generally
represents a woman; the description of its various entrances and exits is scarcely calculated to make us doubt this interpretation.[43] The interest
as to whether the room is open or locked will be readily understood in this connection. (Cf. Dora's dream in Fragment of an Analysis of Hysteria.)
There is no need to be explicit as to the sort of key that will unlock the room; the symbolism of lock and key has been gracefully if broadly
employed by Uhland in his song of the Graf Eberstein. - The dream of walking through a suite of rooms signifies a brothel or a harem. But, as H.
Sachs has shown by an admirable example, it is also employed to represent marriage (contrast). An interesting relation to the sexual
investigations of childhood emerges when the dreamer dreams of two rooms which were previously one, or finds that a familiar room in a house
of which he dreams has been divided into two, or the reverse. In childhood the female genitals and anus (the "behind")[44] are conceived of as a
single opening according to the infantile cloaca theory, and only later is it discovered that this region of the body contains two separate cavities
and openings. Steep inclines, ladders and stairs, and going up or down them, are symbolic representations of the sexual act.[45] Smooth walls
over which one climbs, facades of houses, across which one lets oneself down - often with a sense of great anxiety - correspond to erect human
bodies, and probably repeat in our dreams childish memories of climbing up parents or nurses. Smooth walls are men; in anxiety dreams one
often holds firmly to projections on houses. Tables, whether bare or covered, and boards, are women, perhaps by virtue of contrast, since they
have no protruding contours. Wood generally speaking, seems, in accordance with its linguistic relations, to represent feminine matter (Materie).
The name of the island Madeira means wood in Portuguese. Since bed and board (mensa et thorus) constitute marriage, in dreams the latter is
often substituted for the former, and as far as practicable the sexual representation-complex is transposed to the eating-complex. - Of articles of
dress, a woman's hat may very often be interpreted with certainty as the male genitals. In the dreams of men, one often finds the necktie as a
symbol for the penis; this is not only because neckties hang down in front of the body, and are characteristic of men, but also because one can
select them at pleasure, a freedom which nature prohibits as regards the original of the symbol. Persons who make use of this symbol in dreams
are very extravagant in the matter of ties, and possess whole collections of them.[46] All complicated machines and appliances are very probably
the genitals - as a rule the male genitals - in the description of which the symbolism of dreams is as indefatigable as human wit. It is quite
unmistakable that all weapons and tools are used as symbols for the male organ: e.g., ploughshare, hammer, gun, revolver, dagger, sword, etc.
Again, many of the landscapes seen in dreams, especially those that contain bridges or wooded mountains, may be readily recognized as
descriptions of the genitals. Marcinowski collected a series of examples in which the dreamer explained his dream by means of drawings, in order
to represent the landscapes and places appearing in it. These drawings clearly showed the distinction between the manifest and the latent meaning
of the dream. Whereas, naively regarded, they seemed to represent plans, maps, and so forth, closer investigation showed that they were
representations of the human body, of the genitals, etc., and only after conceiving them thus could the dream be understood.[47] Finally, where
one finds incomprehensible neologisms one may suspect combinations of components having a sexual significance. - Children, too, often signify
the genitals, since men and women are in the habit of fondly referring to their genital organs as little man, little woman, little thing. The little
brother was correctly recognized by Stekel as the penis. To play with or to beat a little child is often the dream's representation of masturbation.
The dream-work represents castration by baldness, hair-cutting, the loss of teeth, and beheading. As an insurance against castration, the dream
uses one of the common symbols of the penis in double or multiple form and the appearance in a dream of a lizard - an animal whose tail, if
pulled off, is regenerated by a new growth - has the same meaning. Most of those animals which are utilized as genital symbols in mythology and
folklore play this part also in dreams: the fish, the snail, the cat, the mouse (on account of the hairiness of the genitals), but above all the snake,
which is the most important symbol of the male member. Small animals and vermin are substitutes for little children, e.g., undesired sisters or
brothers. To be infected with vermin is often the equivalent for pregnancy. - As a very recent symbol of the male organ I may mention the airship,
whose employment is justified by its relation to flying, and also, occasionally, by its form. - Stekel has given a number of other symbols, not yet
sufficiently verified, which he has illustrated by examples. The works of this author, and especially his book: Die Sprache des Traumes, contain
the richest collection of interpretations of symbols, some of which were ingeniously guessed and were proved to be correct upon investigation, as,
for example, in the section on the symbolism of death. The author's lack of critical reflection, and his tendency to generalize at all costs, make his
interpretations doubtful or inapplicable, so that in making use of his works caution is urgently advised. I shall therefore restrict myself to
mentioning a few examples. -
Right and left, according to Stekel, are to be understood in dreams in an ethical sense. "The right-hand path always signifies the way to
righteousness, the left-hand path the path to crime. Thus the left may signify homosexuality, incest, and perversion, while the right signifies
marriage, relations with a prostitute, etc. The meaning is always determined by the individual moral standpoint of the dreamer" (loc. cit., p. 466).
Relatives in dreams generally stand for the genitals (p. 473). Here I can confirm this meaning only for the son, the daughter, and the younger
sister - that is, wherever little thing could be employed. On the other hand, verified examples allow us to recognize sisters as symbols of the
breasts, and brothers as symbols of the larger hemispheres. To be unable to overtake a carriage is interpreted by Stekel as regret at being unable to
catch up with a difference in age (p. 479). The luggage of a traveller is the burden of sin by which one is oppressed (ibid.) But a traveller's
luggage often proves to be an unmistakable symbol of one's own genitals. To numbers, which frequently occur in dreams, Stekel has assigned a
fixed symbolic meaning, but these interpretations seem neither sufficiently verified nor of universal validity, although in individual cases they can
usually be recognized as plausible. We have, at all events, abundant confirmation that the figure three is a symbol of the male genitals. One of
Stekel's generalizations refers to the double meaning of the genital symbols. "Where is there a symbol," he asks, "which (if in any way permitted
by the imagination) may not be used simultaneously in the masculine and the feminine sense?" To be sure, the clause in parenthesis retracts much
of the absolute character of this assertion, for this double meaning is not always permitted by the imagination. Still, I think it is not superfluous to
state that in my experience this general statement of Stekel's requires elaboration. Besides those symbols which are just as frequently employed
for the male as for the female genitals, there are others which preponderantly, or almost exclusively, designate one of the sexes, and there are yet
others which, so far as we know, have only the male or only the female signification. To use long, stiff objects and weapons as symbols of the
female genitals, or hollow objects (chests, boxes, etc.) as symbols of the male genitals, is certainly not permitted by the imagination.
It is true that the tendency of dreams, and of the unconscious phantasy, to employ the sexual symbols bisexually, reveals an archaic trait, for in
childhood the difference in the genitals is unknown, and the same genitals are attributed to both sexes. One may also be misled as regards the
significance of a bisexual symbol if one forgets the fact that in some dreams a general reversal of sexes takes place, so that the male organ is
represented by the female, and vice versa. Such dreams express, for example, the wish of a woman to be a man.
The genitals may even be represented in dreams by other parts of the body: the male member by the hand or the foot, the female genital orifice by
the mouth, the ear, or even the eye. The secretions of the human body - mucus, tears, urine, semen, etc. - may be used in dreams interchangeably.
This statement of Stekel's, correct in the main, has suffered a justifiable critical restriction as the result of certain comments of R. Reitler's
(Internat. Zeitschr. fur Psych., i, 1913). The gist of the matter is the replacement of an important secretion, such as the semen, by an indifferent
one.
These very incomplete indications may suffice to stimulate others to make a more painstaking collection.[48] I have attempted a much more
detailed account of dream-symbolism in my General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis. -
I shall now append a few instances of the use of such symbols, which will show how impossible it is to arrive at the interpretation of a dream if
one excludes dream-symbolism, but also how in many cases it is imperatively forced upon one. At the same time, I must expressly warn the
investigator against overestimating the importance of symbols in the interpretation of dreams, restricting the work of dream-translation to the
translation of symbols, and neglecting the technique of utilizing the associations of the dreamer. The two techniques of dream-interpretation must
supplement one another; practically, however, as well as theoretically, precedence is retained by the latter process, which assigns the final
significance to the utterances of the dreamer, while the symbol-translation which we undertake play an auxiliary part.
1. The hat as the symbol of a man (of the male genitals): [49]
(A fragment from the dream of a young woman who suffered from agoraphobia as the result of her fear of temptation.) -
I am walking in the street in summer; I am wearing a straw hat of peculiar shape, the middle piece of which is bent upwards, while the side pieces
hang downwards (here the description hesitates), and in such a fashion that one hangs lower than the other. I am cheerful and in a confident
mood, and as I pass a number of young officers I think to myself: You can't do anything to me.
As she could produce no associations to the hat, I said to her: "The hat is really a male genital organ, with its raised middle piece and the two
downward-hanging side pieces." It is perhaps peculiar that her hat should be supposed to be a man, but after all one says: Unter die Haube
kommen (to get under the cap) when we mean: to get married. I intentionally refrained from interpreting the details concerning the unequal
dependence of the two side pieces, although the determination of just such details must point the way to the interpretation. I went on to say that if,
therefore, she had a husband with such splendid genitals she would not have to fear the officers; that is, she would have nothing to wish from
them, for it was essentially her temptation - phantasies which prevented her from going about unprotected and unaccompanied. This last
explanation of her anxiety I had already been able to give her repeatedly on the basis of other material.
It is quite remarkable how the dreamer behaved after this interpretation. She withdrew her description of the hat and would not admit that she had
said that the two side pieces were hanging down. I was, however, too sure of what I had heard to allow myself to be misled, and so I insisted that
she did say it. She was quiet for a while, and then found the courage to ask why it was that one of her husband's testicles was lower than the other,
and whether it was the same with all men. With this the peculiar detail of the hat was explained, and the whole interpretation was accepted by her.
The hat symbol was familiar to me long before the patient related this dream. From other but less transparent cases I believed that I might assume
the hat could also stand for the female genitals.[50] -
2. The little one as the genital organ. Being run over as a symbol of sexual intercourse. 
(Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.)
Her mother sends away her little daughter so that she has to go alone. She then drives with her mother to the railway station, and sees her little
one walking right along the track, so that she is bound to be run over. She hears the bones crack. (At this she experiences a feeling of discomfort
but no real horror.) She then looks through the carriage window, to see whether the parts cannot be seen behind. Then she reproaches her mother
for allowing the little one to go out alone.
Analysis. - It is not an easy matter to give here a complete interpretation of the dream. It forms part of a cycle of dreams, and can be fully
understood only in connection with the rest. For it is not easy to obtain the material necessary to demonstrate the symbolism in a sufficiently
isolated condition. The patient at first finds that the railway journey is to be interpreted historically as an allusion to a departure from a sanatoriumfor nervous diseases, with whose director she was, of course, in love. Her mother fetched her away, and before her departure the physician came
to the railway station and gave her a bunch of flowers; she felt uncomfortable because her mother witnessed this attention. Here the mother,
therefore, appears as the disturber of her tender feelings, a role actually played by this strict woman during her daughter's girlhood. - The next
association referred to the sentence: She then looks to see whether the parts cannot be seen behind. In the dream-facade one would naturally be
compelled to think of the pieces of the little daughter who had been run over and crushed. The association, however, turns in quite a different
direction. She recalls that she once saw her father in the bath-room, naked, from behind; she then begins to talk about sex differences, and
remarks that in the man the genitals can be seen from behind, but in the woman they cannot. In this connection she now herself offers the
interpretation that the little one is the genital organ, and her little one (she has a four-year-old daughter) her own organ. She reproaches her
mother for wanting her to live as though she had no genitals, and recognizes this reproach in the introductory sentence of the dream: the mother
sends her little one away, so that she has to go alone. In her phantasy, going alone through the streets means having no man, no sexual relations
(coire = to go together), and this she does not like. According to all her statements, she really suffered as a girl through her mother's jealousy,
because her father showed a preference for her.
The deeper interpretation of this dream depends upon another dream of the same night, in which the dreamer identifies herself with her brother.
She was a tomboy, and was always being told that she should have been born a boy. This identification with the brother shows with especial
clearness that the little one signifies the genital organ. The mother threatened him (her) with castration, which could only be understood as a
punishment for playing with the genital parts, and the identification, therefore, shows that she herself had masturbated as a child, though she had
retained only a memory of her brother's having done so. An early knowledge of the male genitals, which she lost later, must, according to the
assertions of this second dream, have been acquired at this time. Moreover, the second dream points to the infantile sexual theory that girls
originate from boys as a result of castration. After I had told her of this childish belief, she at once confirmed it by an anecdote in which the boy
asks the girl: "Was it cut off?" to which the girl replies: "No, it's always been like that."
Consequently the sending away of the little one, of the genital organ, in the first dream refers also to the threatened castration. Finally, she blames
her mother for not having borne her as a boy.
That being run over symbolizes sexual intercourse would not be evident from this dream if we had not learned it from many other sources.
3. Representation of the genitals by buildings, stairs, and shafts.
(Dream of a young man inhibited by a father complex.)
He is taking a walk with his father in a place which is certainly the Prater, for one can see the Rotunda, in front of which there is a small vestibule
to which there is attached a captive balloon; the balloon, however, seems rather limp. His father asks him what this is all for; he is surprised at it,
but he explains it to his father. They come into a courtyard in which lies a large sheet of tin. His father wants to pull off a big piece of this, but
first looks round to see if anyone is watching. He tells his father that all he needs to do is to speak to the overseer, and then he can take as much as
he wants to without any more ado. From this courtyard a flight of stairs leads down into a shaft, the walls of which are softly upholstered, rather
like a leather arm-chair. At the end of this shaft there is a long platform, and then a new shaft begins...
Analysis. This dreamer belonged to a type of patient which is not at all promising from a therapeutic point of view; up to a certain point in the
analysis such patients offer no resistance whatever, but from that point onwards they prove to be almost inaccessible. This dream he analysed
almost independently. "The Rotunda," he said, "is my genitals, the captive balloon in front is my penis, about whose flaccidity I have been
worried." We must, however, interpret it in greater detail: the Rotunda is the buttocks, constantly associated by the child with the genitals; the
smaller structure in front is the scrotum. In the dream his father asks him what this is all for - that is, he asks him about the purpose and
arrangement of the genitals. It is quite evident that this state of affairs should be reversed, and that he ought to be the questioner. As such
questioning, on the part of the father never occurred in reality, we must conceive the dream-thought as a wish, or perhaps take it conditionally, as
follows. "If I had asked my father for sexual enlightenment..." The continuation of this thought we shall presently find in another place.
The courtyard in which the sheet of tin is spread out is not to be conceived symbolically in the first instance, but originates from his father's place
of business. For reasons of discretion I have inserted the tin for another material in which the father deals without, however, changing anything in 
the verbal expression of the dream. The dreamer had entered his father's business, and had taken a terrible dislike to the somewhat questionable
practices upon which its profit mainly depended. Hence the continuation of the above dream-thought ("if I had asked him") would be: "He would
have deceived me just as he does his customers." For the pulling off, which serves to represent commercial dishonesty, the dreamer himself gives
a second explanation, namely, masturbation. This is not only quite familiar to us (see above), but agrees very well with the fact that the secrecy of
masturbation is expressed by its opposite (one can do it quite openly). Thus, it agrees entirely with our expectations that the autoerotic activity
should be attributed to the father, just as was the questioning in the first scene of the dream. The shaft he at once interprets as the vagina, by
referring to the soft upholstering of the walls. That the action of coition in the vagina is described as a going down instead of in the usual way as a
going up agrees with what I have found in other instances.[51] -
The details - that at the end of the first shaft there is a long platform, and then a new shaft - he himself explains biographically. He had for some
time had sexual intercourse with women, but had given it up on account of inhibitions, and now hopes to be able to begin it again with the aid of
treatment. The dream, however, becomes indistinct towards the end, and to the experienced interpreter it becomes evident that in the second scene
of the dream the influence of another subject has already begun to assert itself; which is indicated by his father's business, his dishonest practices,
and the vagina represented by the first shaft, so that one may assume a reference to his mother.
4. The male organ symbolized by persons and the female by a landscape.
(Dream of a woman of the lower class, whose husband is a policeman, reported by B. Dattner.)
...Then someone broke into the house and she anxiously called for a policeman. But he went peacefully with two tramps into a church,[52] to
which a great many steps led up,[53] behind the church there was a mountain[54] on top of which there was a dense forest.[55] The policeman
was provided with a helmet, a gorget, and a cloak.[56] The two vagrants, who went along with the policeman quite peaceably, had sack-like
aprons tied round their loins.[57] A road led from the church to the mountain. This road was overgrown on each side with grass and brushwood,
which became thicker and thicker as it reached the top of the mountain, where it spread out into quite a forest. -
5. Castration dreams of children.
(a) A boy aged three years and five months, for whom his father's return from military service is clearly inconvenient, wakes one morning in a
disturbed and excited state, and constantly repeats the question: Why did Daddy carry his head on a plate? Last night Daddy carried his head on a
plate.
(b) A student who is now suffering from a severe obsessional neurosis remembers that in his sixth year he repeatedly had the following dream: He
goes to the barber to have his hair cut. Then a large woman with severe features comes up to him and cuts off his head. He recognizes the woman
as his mother.
6. A modified staircase dream.
To one of my patients, a sexual abstainer, who was very ill, whose phantasy was fixated upon his mother, and who repeatedly dreamed of
climbing stairs while accompanied by his mother, I once remarked that moderate masturbation would probably have been less harmful to him
than his enforced abstinence. The influence of this remark provoked the following dream:
His piano teacher reproaches him for neglecting his piano-playing, and for not practicing the Etudes of Moscheles and Clementi's Gradus ad
Parnassum. With reference to this he remarked that the Gradus, too, is a stairway, and that the piano itself is a stairway, as it has a scale.
It may be said that there is no class of ideas which cannot be enlisted in the representation of sexual facts and wishes.
7. The sensation of reality and the representation of repetition.
A man, now thirty-five, relates a clearly remembered dream which he claims to have had when he was four years of age: The notary with whom
his father's will was deposited - he had lost his father at the age of three - brought two large Emperor-pears, of which he was given one to eat. The
other lay on the window sill of the living-room. He woke with the conviction of the reality of what he had dreamt, and obstinately asked his
mother to give him the second pear; it was, he said, still lying on the window-sill. His mother laughed at this.
Analysis. The notary was a jovial old gentleman who, as he seems to remember, really sometimes brought pears with him. The window-sill was
as he saw it in the dream. Nothing else occurs to him in this connection, except, perhaps, that his mother has recently told him a dream. She has
two birds sitting on her head; she wonders when they will fly away, but they do not fly away, and one of them flies to her mouth and sucks at it.
The dreamer's inability to furnish associations justifies the attempt to interpret it by the substitution of symbols. The two pears - pommes on 
poires - are the breasts of the mother who nursed him; the window-sill is the projection of the bosom, analogous to the balconies in the dream of
houses. His sensation of reality after waking is justified, for his mother had actually suckled him for much longer than the customary term, and
her breast was still available. The dream is to be translated: "Mother, give (show) me the breast again at which I once used to drink." The once is
represented by the eating of the one pear, the again by the desire for the other. The temporal repetition of an act is habitually represented in
dreams by the numerical multiplication of an object
It is naturally a very striking phenomenon that symbolism should already play a part in the dream of a child of four, but this is the rule rather than
the exception. One may say that the dreamer has command of symbolism from the very first.
The early age at which people make use of symbolic representation, even apart from the dream-life, may be shown by the following uninfluenced
memory of a lady who is now twenty-seven: She is in her fourth year. The nursemaid is driving her, with her brother, eleven months younger, and
a cousin, who is between the two in age, to the lavatory, so that they can do their little business there before going for their walk. As the oldest,
she sits on the seat and the other two on chambers. She asks her (female) cousin: Have you a purse, too? Walter has a little sausage, I have a
purse. The cousin answers: Yes, I have a purse, too. The nursemaid listens, laughing, and relates the conversation to the mother, whose reaction is
a sharp reprimand.
Here a dream may be inserted whose excellent symbolism permitted of interpretation with little assistance from the dreamer:
8. The question of symbolism in the dreams of normal persons. [58] -
An objection frequently raised by the opponents of psycho-analysis - - and recently also by Havelock Ellis[59] - - is that, although dreamsymbolism may perhaps be a product of the neurotic psyche, it has no validity whatever in the case of normal persons. But while psychoanalysis
recognizes no essential distinctions, but only quantitative differences, between the psychic life of the normal person and that of the neurotic, the
analysis of those dreams in which, in sound and sick persons alike, the repressed complexes display the same activity, reveals the absolute
identity of the mechanisms as well as of the symbolism. Indeed, the natural dreams of healthy persons often contain a much simpler, more
transparent, and more characteristic symbolism than those of neurotics, which, owing to the greater strictness of the censorship and the more
extensive dream-distortion resulting therefrom, are frequently troubled and obscured, and are therefore more difficult to translate. The following
dream serves to illustrate this fact. This dream comes from a non-neurotic girl of a rather prudish and reserved type. In the course of conversation
I found that she was engaged to be married, but that there were hindrances in the way of the marriage which threatened to postpone it. She related
spontaneously the following dream: -
I arrange the centre of a table with flowers for a birthday. On being questioned she states that in the dream she seemed to be at home (she has no
home at the time) and experienced a feeling of happiness.
The popular symbolism enables me to translate the dream for myself. It is the expression of her wish to be married: the table, with the flowers in
the centre, is symbolic of herself and her genitals. She represents her future fulfilled, inasmuch as she is already occupied with the thoughts of the
birth of a child; so the wedding has taken place long ago.
I call her attention to the fact that the centre of a table is an unusual expression, which she admits; but here, of course, I cannot question her more
directly. I carefully refrain from suggesting to her the meaning of the symbols, and ask her only for the thoughts which occur to her mind in
connection with the individual parts of the dream. In the course of the analysis her reserve gave way to a distinct interest in the interpretation, and
a frankness which was made possible by the serious tone of the conversation. To my question as to what kind of flowers they had been, her first
answer is: expensive flowers; one has to pay for them; then she adds that they were lilies-of-the-valley, violets, and pinks or carnations. I took the
word lily in this dream in its popular sense, as a symbol of chastity; she confirmed this, as purity occurred to her in association with lily. Valley is
a common feminine dream-symbol. The chance juxtaposition of the two symbols in the name of the flower is made into a piece of dreamsymbolism, and serves to emphasize the preciousness of her virginity - expensive flowers; one has to pay for them - and expresses the expectation
that her husband will know how to appreciate its value. The comment, expensive flowers, etc. has, as will be shown, a different meaning in every
one of the three different flower-symbols.
I thought of what seemed to me a venturesome explanation of the hidden meaning of the apparently quite asexual word violets by an unconscious
relation to the French viol. But to my surprise the dreamer's association was the English word violate. The accidental phonetic similarity of the
two words violet and violate is utilized by the dream to express in the language of flowers the idea of the violence of defloration (another word
which makes use of flower-symbolism), and perhaps also to give expression to a masochistic tendency on the part of the girl. An excellent
example of the word bridges across which run the paths to the unconscious. One has to pay for them here means life, with which she has to pay
for becoming a wife and a mother.
In association with pinks, which she then calls carnations, I think of carnal. But her association is colour, to which she adds that carnations are the
flowers which her fiance gives her frequently and in large quantities. At the end of the conversation she suddenly admits, spontaneously, that she
has not told me the truth; the word that occurred to her was not colour, but incarnation, the very word I expected. Moreover, even the word colour 
is not a remote association; it was determined by the meaning of carnation (i.e., flesh-colour) - that is, by the complex. This lack of honesty shows
that the resistance here is at its greatest because the symbolism is here most transparent, and the struggle between libido and repression is most
intense in connection with this phallic theme. The remark that these flowers were often given her by her fiance is, together with the double
meaning of carnation, a still further indication of their phallic significance in the dream. The occasion of the present of flowers during the day is
employed to express the thought of a sexual present and a return present. She gives her virginity and expects in return for it a rich love-life. But
the words: expensive flowers; one has to pay for them may have a real, financial meaning. The flower-symbolism in the dream thus comprises the
virginal female, the male symbol, and the reference to violent defloration. It is to be noted that sexual flower-symbolism, which, of course, is very
widespread, symbolizes the human sexual organs by flowers, the sexual organs of plants; indeed, presents of flowers between lovers may have
this unconscious significance.
The birthday for which she is making preparations in the dream probably signifies the birth of a child. She identifies herself with the bridegroom,
and represents him preparing her for a birth (having coitus with her). It is as though the latent thought were to say: "If I were he, I would not wait,
but I would deflower the bride without asking her; I would use violence." Indeed, the word violate points to this. Thus even the sadistic libidinal
components find expression.
In a deeper stratum of the dream the sentence I arrange, etc., probably has an auto-erotic, that is, an infantile significance.
She also has a knowledge - possibly only in the dream - of her physical need; she sees herself flat like a table, so that she emphasizes all the more
her virginity, the costliness of the centre (another time she calls it a centre-piece of flowers). Even the horizontal element of the table may
contribute something to the symbol. The concentration of the dream is worthy of remark: nothing is superfluous, every word is a symbol.
Later on she brings me a supplement to this dream: I decorate the flowers with green crinkled paper. She adds that it was fancy paper of the sort
which is used to disguise ordinary flower-pots. She says also: "To hide untidy things, whatever was to be seen which was not pretty to the eye;
there is a gap, a little space in the flowers. The paper looks like velvet or moss." With decorate she associates decorum, as I expected. The green
colour is very prominent, and with this she associates hope, yet another reference to pregnancy. In this part of the dream the identification with
the man is not the dominant feature, but thoughts of shame and frankness express themselves. She makes herself beautiful for him; she admits
physical defects, of which she is ashamed and which she wishes to correct. The associations velvet and moss distinctly point to crines pubis.
The dream is an expression of thoughts hardly known to the waking state of the girl; thoughts which deal with the love of the senses and its
organs; she is prepared for a birth-day, i.e., she has coitus; the fear of defloration and perhaps the pleasurably toned pain find expression; she
admits her physical defects and over-compensates them by means of an over-estimation of the value of her virginity. Her shame excuses the
emerging sensuality by the fact that the aim of it all is the child. Even material considerations, which are foreign to the lover, find expression
here. The affect of the simple dream - the feeling of bliss - shows that here strong emotional complexes have found satisfaction.
I close with the
9. Dream of a chemist.
(A young man who has been trying to give up his habit of masturbation by substituting intercourse with a woman.)
Preliminary statement: On the day before the dream he had been instructing a student as to Grignard's reaction, in which magnesium is dissolved
in absolutely pure ether under the catalytic influence of iodine. Two days earlier there had been an explosion in the course of the same reaction, in
which someone had burned his hand.
Dream I. He is going to make phenylmagnesiumbromide; he sees the apparatus with particular distinctness, but he has substituted himself for the
magnesium. He is now in a curious, wavering attitude. He keeps on repeating to himself: "This is the right thing, it is working, my feet are
beginning to dissolve, and my knees are getting soft." Then he reaches down and feels for his feet, and meanwhile (he does not know how) he
takes his legs out of the carboy, and then again he says to himself: "That can't be... Yes, it has been done correctly." Then he partially wakes, and
repeats the dream to himself, because he wants to tell it to me. He is positively afraid of the analysis of the dream. He is much excited during this
state of semi-sleep, and repeats continually: "Phenyl, phenyl."
II. He is in... with his whole family. He is supposed to be at the Schottentor at half-past eleven in order to keep an appointment with the lady in
question, but he does not wake until half-past eleven. He says to himself: "It is too late now; when you get there it will be half-past twelve." The
next moment he sees the whole family gathered about the table - his mother and the parlourmaid with the soup tureen with peculiar distinctness.
Then he says to himself: "Well, if we are sitting down to eat already, I certainly can't get away."
Analysis. He feels sure that even the first dream contains a reference to the lady whom he is to meet at the place of rendezvous (the dream was
dreamed during the night before the expected meeting). The student whom he was instructing is a particularly unpleasant fellow; the chemist had
said to him: "That isn't right, because the magnesium was still unaffected," and the student had answered, as though he were quite unconcerned: 
"Nor it is." He himself must be this student; he is as indifferent to his analysis as the student is to his synthesis; the he in the dream, however, who
performs the operation, is myself. How unpleasant he must seem to me with his indifference to the result!
Again, he is the material with which the analysis (synthesis) is made. For the question is the success of the treatment. The legs in the dream recall
an impression of the previous evening. He met a lady at a dancing class of whom he wished to make a conquest; he pressed her to him so closely
that she once cried out. As he ceased to press her legs he felt her firm, responding pressure against his lower thighs as far as just above the knees,
the spot mentioned in the dream. In this situation, then, the woman is the magnesium in the retort, which is at last working. He is feminine
towards me, as he is virile towards the woman. If he succeeds with the woman, the treatment will also succeed. Feeling himself and becoming
aware of his knees refers to masturbation, and corresponds to his fatigue of the previous day... The rendezvous had actually been made for halfpast eleven. His wish to oversleep himself and to keep to his sexual object at home (that is, masturbation) corresponds to his resistance.
He says, in respect to the repetition of the name phenyl, that all these radicals ending in yl have always been pleasing to him; they are very
convenient to use: benzyl, acetyl, etc. That, however, explained nothing. But when I proposed the root Schlemihl he laughed heartily, and told me
that during the summer he had read a book by Prevost which contained a chapter: "Les exclus de l'amour," and in this there was some mention of
Schlemilies; and in reading of these outcasts he said to himself: "That is my case." He would have played the Schlemihl if he had missed the
appointment.
It seems that the sexual symbolism of dreams has already been directly confirmed by experiment. In 1912 Dr. K. Schrotter, at the instance of H.
Swoboda, produced dreams in deeply hypnotized persons by suggestions which determined a large part of the dream-content. If the suggestion
proposed that the subject should dream of normal or abnormal sexual relations, the dream carried out these orders by replacing sexual material by
the symbols with which psycho-analytic dream-interpretation has made us familiar. Thus, following the suggestion that the dreamer should dream
of homosexual relations with a lady friend, this friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby travelling-bag, upon which there was a label with
the printed words: "For ladies only." The dreamer was believed never to have heard of dream-symbolization or of dream-interpretation.
Unfortunately, the value of this important investigation was diminished by the fact that Dr. Schrotter shortly afterwards committed suicide. Of his
dream-experiments be gave us only a preliminary report in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse.
Only when we have formed a due estimate of the importance of symbolism in dreams can we continue the study of the typical dreams which was
interrupted in an earlier chapter. I feel justified in dividing these dreams roughly into two classes; first, those which always really have the same
meaning, and second, those which despite the same or a similar content must nevertheless be given the most varied interpretations. Of the typical
dreams belonging to the first class I have already dealt fairly fully with the examination-dream.
On account of their similar affective character, the dreams of missing a train deserve to be ranked with the examination-dreams; moreover, their
interpretation justifies this approximation. They are consolation-dreams, directed against another anxiety perceived in dreams - the fear of death.
To depart is one of the most frequent and one of the most readily established of the death-symbols. The dream therefore says consolingly:
"Reassure yourself, you are not going to die (to depart)," just as the examination-dream calms us by saying: "Don't be afraid; this time, too,
nothing will happen to you." The difficulty is understanding both kinds of dreams is due to the fact that the anxiety is attached precisely to the
expression of consolation.
The meaning of the dreams due to dental stimulus which I have often enough had to analyse in my patients escaped me for a long time because,
much to my astonishment, they habitually offered too great a resistance to interpretation. But finally an overwhelming mass of evidence
convinced me that in the case of men nothing other than the masturbatory desires of puberty furnish the motive power of these dreams. I shall
analyse two such dreams, one of which is also a flying dream. The two dreams were dreamed by the same person - a young man of pronounced
homosexuality which, however, has been inhibited in life.
He is witnessing a performance of Fidelio from the stalls the of the operahouse; sitting next to L, whose personality is congenial to him, and
whose friendship he would like to have. Suddenly he flies diagonally right across the stalls; he then puts his hand in his mouth and draws out two
of his teeth.
He himself describes the flight by saying that it was as though he were thrown into the air. As the opera performed was Fidelio, he recalls the
words: -
He who a charming wife acquires.... -
But the acquisition of even the most charming wife is not among the wishes of the dreamer. Two other lines would be more appropriate: -
He who succeeds in the lucky (big) throw
The friend of a friend to be.... - 
The dream thus contains the lucky (big) throw which is not, however, a wish-fulfilment only. For it conceals also the painful reflection that in his
striving after friendship he has often had the misfortune to be thrown out, and the fear lest this fate may be repeated in the case of the young man
by whose side he has enjoyed the performance of Fidelio. This is now followed by a confession, shameful to a man of his refinement, to the effect
that once, after such a rejection on the part of a friend, his profound sexual longing caused him to masturbate twice in succession.
The other dream is as follows: Two university professors of his acquaintance are treating him in my place. One of them does something to his
penis; he is afraid of an operation. The other thrusts an iron bar against his mouth, so that he loses one or two teeth. He is bound with four silk
handkerchiefs.
The sexual significance of this dream can hardly be doubted. The silk handkerchiefs allude to an identification with a homosexual of his
acquaintance. The dreamer, who has never achieved coition (nor has he ever actually sought sexual intercourse) with men, conceives the sexual
act on the lines of masturbation with which he was familiar during puberty.
I believe that the frequent modifications of the typical dream due to dental stimulus - that, for example, in which another person draws the tooth
from the dreamer's mouth - will be made intelligible by the same explanation.[60] It may, however, be difficult to understand how dental stimulus
can have come to have this significance. But here I may draw attention to the frequent displacement from below to above which is at the service
of sexual repression, and by means of which all kinds of sensations and intentions occurring in hysteria, which ought to be localized in the
genitals, may at all events be realized in other, unobjectionable parts of the body. We have a case of such displacement when the genitals are
replaced by the face in the symbolism of unconscious thought. This is corroborated by the fact that verbal usage relates the buttocks to the cheeks,
and the labia minora to the lips which enclose the orifice of the mouth. The nose is compared to the penis in numerous allusions, and in each case
the presence of hair completes the resemblance. Only one feature - the teeth - is beyond all possibility of being compared in this way; but it is just
this coincidence of agreement and disagreement which makes the teeth suitable for purposes of representation under the pressure of sexual
repression. -
I will not assert that the interpretation of dreams due to dental stimulus as dreams of masturbation (the correctness of which I cannot doubt) has
been freed of all obscurity.[61] I carry the explanation as far as I am able, and must leave the rest unsolved. But I must refer to yet another
relation indicated by a colloquial expression. In Austria there is in use an indelicate designation for the act of masturbation, namely: "To pull one
out," or "to pull one off."[62] I am unable to say whence these colloquialisms originate, or on what symbolisms they are based; but the teeth
would very well fit in with the first of the two. -
Dreams of pulling teeth, and of teeth falling out, are interpreted in popular belief to mean the death of a connection. Psycho-analysis can admit of
such a meaning only at the most as a joking allusion to the sense already indicated.
To the second group of typical dreams belong those in which one is flying or hovering, falling, swimming, etc. What do these dreams signify?
Here we cannot generalize. They mean, as we shall learn, something different in each case; only, the sensory material which they contain always
comes from the same source.
We must conclude from the information obtained in psycho-analysis that these dreams also repeat impressions of our childhood - that is, that they
refer to the games involving movement which have such an extraordinary attraction for children. Where is the uncle who has never made a child
fly by running with it across the room, with outstretched arms, or has never played at falling with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly
straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly pretending to withdraw his supporting hand? At such moments children shout
with joy and insatiably demand a repetition of the performance, especially if a little fright and dizziness are involved in it. In after years they
repeat their sensations in dreams, but in dreams they omit the hands that held them, so that now they are free to float or fall. We know that all
small children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see-sawing; and when they see gymnastic performances at the circus their
recollection of such games is refreshed. In some boys the hysterical attack consists simply in the reproduction of such performances, which they
accomplish with great dexterity. Not infrequently sexual sensations are excited by these games of movement, innocent though they are in
themselves. To express the matter in a few words: it is these romping games of childhood which are being repeated in dreams of flying, falling,
vertigo, and the like, but the pleasurable sensations are now transformed into anxiety. But, as every mother knows, the romping of children often
enough ends in quarrelling and tears.
I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that it is the condition of our cutaneous sensations during sleep, the sensation of the
movements of the lungs, etc., that evoke dreams of flying and falling. As I see it, these sensations have themselves been reproduced from the
memory to which the dream refers - that they are therefore dream-content, and not dream - sources.[63] -
This material, consisting of sensations of motion, similar in character, and originating from the same sources, is now used for the representation
of the most manifold dream-thoughts. Dreams of flying or hovering, for the most part pleasurably toned, will call for the most widely differing
interpretations - interpretations of a quite special nature in the case of some dreamers, and interpretations of a typical nature in that of others. One
of my patients was in the habit of dreaming very frequently that she was hovering a little way above the street without touching the ground. She
was very short of stature, and she shunned every sort of contamination involved by intercourse with human beings. Her dream of suspension - 
which raised her feet above the ground and allowed her head to tower into the air - fulfilled both of her wishes. In the case of other dreamers of
the same sex, the dream of flying had the significance of the longing: "If only I were a little bird!" Similarly, others become angels at night,
because no one has ever called them angels by day. The intimate connection between flying and the idea of a bird makes it comprehensible that
the dream of flying, in the case of male dreamers, should usually have a coarsely sensual significance;[64] and we should not be surprised to hear
that this or that dreamer is always very proud of his ability to fly. -
Dr. Paul Federn (Vienna) has propounded the fascinating theory that a great many flying dreams are erection dreams, since the remarkable
phenomenon of erection, which constantly occupies the human phantasy, cannot fail to be impressive as an apparent suspension of the laws of
gravity (cf. the winged phalli of the ancients).
It is a noteworthy fact that a prudent experimenter like Mourly Vold, who is really averse to any kind of interpretation, nevertheless defends the
erotic interpretation of the dreams of flying and hovering.[65] He describes the erotic element as "the most important motive factor of the
hovering dream," and refers to the strong sense of bodily vibration which accompanies this type of dream, and the frequent connection of such
dreams with erections and emissions. -
Dreams of falling are more frequently characterized by anxiety. Their interpretation, when they occur in women, offers no difficulty, because they
nearly always accept the symbolic meaning of falling, which is a circumlocution for giving way to an erotic temptation. We have not yet
exhausted the infantile sources of the dream of falling; nearly all children have fallen occasionally, and then been picked up and fondled; if they
fell out of bed at night, they were picked up by the nurse and taken into her bed.
People who dream often, and with great enjoyment, of swimming, cleaving the waves, etc., have usually been bed-wetters, and they now repeat in
the dream a pleasure which they have long since learned to forego. We shall soon learn, from one example or another, to what representations
dreams of swimming easily lend themselves.
The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies a prohibition of the nursery, which forbids children to play with fire so that they may not wet the bed
at night. These dreams also are based on reminiscences of the enuresis nocturna of childhood. In my "Fragment of an Analysis of Hysteria"[66] I
have given the complete analysis and synthesis of such a dream of fire in connection with the infantile history of the dreamer, and have shown for
the representation of what maturer impulses this infantile material has been utilized. -
It would be possible to cite quite a number of other typical dreams, if by such one understands dreams in which there is a frequent recurrence, in
the dreams of different persons, of the same manifest dream-content. For example: dreams of passing through narrow alleys, or a whole suite of
rooms; dreams of burglars, in respect of whom nervous people take measures of precaution before going to bed; dreams of being chased by wild
animals (bulls, horses); or of being threatened with knives, daggers, and lances. The last two themes are characteristic of the manifest dreamcontent of persons suffering from anxiety, etc. A special investigation of this class of material would be well worth while. In lieu of this I shall
offer two observations, which do not, however, apply exclusively to typical dreams.
The more one is occupied with the solution of dreams, the readier one becomes to acknowledge that the majority of the dreams of adults deal with
sexual material and give expression to erotic wishes. Only those who really analyse dreams, that is, those who penetrate from their manifest
content to the latent dream-thoughts, can form an opinion on this subject; but never those who are satisfied with registering merely the manifest
content (as, for example, Nacke in his writings on sexual dreams). Let us recognize at once that there is nothing astonishing in this fact, which is
entirely consistent with the principles of dream-interpretation. No other instinct has had to undergo so much suppression, from the time of
childhood onwards, as the sexual instinct in all its numerous components:[67] from no other instincts are so many and such intense unconscious
wishes left over, which now, in the sleeping state, generate dreams. In dream-interpretation this importance of the sexual complexes must never
be forgotten, though one must not, of course, exaggerate it to the exclusion of all other factors. -
Of many dreams it may be ascertained, by careful interpretation, that they may even be understood bisexually, inasmuch as they yield an
indisputable over-interpretation, in which they realize homosexual impulses - that is, impulses which are contrary to the normal sexual activity of
the dreamer. But that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually, as Stekel[68] maintains, and Adler,[69] seems to me to be a generalization as
insusceptible of proof as it is improbable, and one which, therefore, I should be loth to defend; for I should, above all, be at a loss to know how to
dispose of the obvious fact that there are many dreams which satisfy other than erotic needs (taking the word in the widest sense), as, for example,
dreams of hunger, thirst, comfort, etc. And other similar assertions, to the effect that "behind every dream one finds a reference to death" (Stekel),
or that every dream shows "an advance from the feminine to the masculine line" (Adler), seem to me to go far beyond the admissible in the
interpretation of dreams. The assertion that all dreams call for a sexual interpretation, against which there is such an untiring polemic in the
literature of the subject, is quite foreign to my Interpretation of Dreams. It will not be found in any of the eight editions of this book, and is in
palpable contradiction to the rest of its contents. -
We have stated elsewhere that dreams which are conspicuously innocent commonly embody crude erotic wishes, and this we might confirm by
numerous further examples. But many dreams which appear indifferent, in which we should never suspect a tendency in any particular direction,
may be traced, according to the analysis, to unmistakably sexual wish-impulses, often of an unsuspected nature. For example, who, before it had 
been interpreted, would have suspected a sexual wish in the following dream? The dreamer relates: Between two stately palaces there stands, a
little way back, a small house, whose doors are closed. My wife leads me along the little bit of road leading to the house and pushes the door
open, and then I slip quickly and easily into the interior of a courtyard that slopes steeply upwards.
Anyone who has had experience in the translating of dreams will, of course, at once be reminded that penetration into narrow spaces and the
opening of locked doors are among the commonest of sexual symbols, and will readily see in this dream a representation of attempted coition
from behind (between the two stately buttocks of the female body). The narrow, steep passage is, of course, the vagina; the assistance attributed
to the wife of the dreamer requires the interpretation that in reality it is only consideration for the wife which is responsible for abstention from
such an attempt. Moreover, inquiry shows that on the previous day a young girl had entered the household of the dreamer; she had pleased him,
and had given him the impression that she would not be altogether averse to an approach of this sort. The little house between the two palaces is
taken from a reminiscence of the Hradschin in Prague, and once more points to the girl, who is a native of that city.
If, in conversation with my patients, I emphasize the frequency of the Oedipus dream - the dream of having sexual intercourse with one's mother -
I elicit the answer: "I cannot remember such a dream." Immediately afterwards, however, there arises the recollection of another, an
unrecognizable, indifferent dream, which the patient has dreamed repeatedly, and which on analysis proves to be a dream with this very content -
that is, yet another Oedipus dream. I can assure the reader that disguised dreams of sexual intercourse with the dreamer's mother are far more
frequent than undisguised dreams to the same effect.[70] -
Typical example of a disguised Oedipus dream:
A man dreams: He has a secret affair with a woman whom another man wishes to marry. He is concerned lest the other should discover this
relation and abandon the marriage; he therefore behaves very affectionately to the man; he nestles up to him and kisses him. The facts of the
dreamer's life touch the dream-content only at one point. He has a secret affair with a married woman, and an equivocal expression of her
husband, with whom he is on friendly terms, aroused in him the suspicion that he might have noticed something of this relationship. There is,
however, in reality, yet another factor, the mention of which was avoided in the dream, and which alone gives the key to it. The life of the
husband is threatened by an organic malady. His wife is prepared for the possibility of his sudden death, and our dreamer consciously harbours
the intention of marrying the young widow after her husband's decease. It is through this objective situation that the dreamer finds himself
transferred into the constellation of the Oedipus dream; his wish is to be enabled to kill the man, so that he may win the woman for his wife; his
dream gives expression to the wish in a hypocritical distortion. Instead of representing her as already married to the other man, it represents the
other man only as wishing to marry her, which indeed corresponds with his own secret intention, and the hostile whishes directed against the man
are concealed under demonstrations of affection, which are reminiscences of his childish relations to his father. -
There are dreams of landscapes and localities in which emphasis is always laid upon the assurance: "I have been here before." but this Deja vu
has a special significance in dreams. In this case the locality is the genitals of the mother; of no other place can it be asserted with such certainty
that one has been here before. I was once puzzled by the account of a dream given by a patient afflicted with obsessional neurosis. He dreamed
that he called at a house where he had been twice before. But this very patient had long ago told me of an episode of his sixth year. At that time
he shared his mother's bed, and had abused the occasion by inserting his finger into his mother's genitals while she was asleep.
A large number of dreams, which are frequently full of anxiety, and often have for content the traversing of narrow spaces, or staying long in the
water, are based upon phantasies concerning the intra-uterine life, the sojourn in the mother's womb, and the act of birth. I here insert the dream
of a young man who, in his phantasy, has even profited by the intra-uterine opportunity of spying upon an act of coition between his parents.
He is in a deep shaft, in which there is a window, as in the Semmering tunnel. Through this he sees at first an empty landscape, and then he
composes a picture in it, which is there all at once and fills up the empty space. The picture represents a field which is being deeply tilled by an
implement, and the wholesome air, the associated idea of hard work, and the bluish-black clods of earth make a pleasant impression on him. He
then goes on and sees a work on education lying open... and is surprised that so much attention is devoted in it to the sexual feelings (of children),
which makes him think of me.
Here is a pretty water-dream of a female patient, which was turned to special account in the course of treatment.
At her usual holiday resort on the... Lake, she flings herself into the dark water at a place where the pale moon is reflected in the water.
Dreams of this sort are parturition dreams; their interpretation is effected by reversing the fact recorded in the manifest dream-content; thus,
instead of flinging oneself into the water, read coming out of the water - that is, being born.[71] The place from which one is born may be
recognized if one thinks of the humorous sense of the French la lune. The pale moon thus becomes the white bottom, which the child soon
guesses to be the place from which it came. Now what can be the meaning of the patient's wishing to be born at a holiday resort? I asked the
dreamer this, and she replied without hesitation: "Hasn't the treatment made me as though I were born again?" Thus the dream becomes an
invitation to continue the treatment at this summer resort - that is, to visit her there; perhaps it also contains a very bashful allusion to the wish to
become a mother herself.[72] - 
Another dream of parturition, with its interpretation, I take from a paper by E. Jones. "She stood at the seashore watching a small boy, who
seemed to be hers, wading into the water. This he did till the water covered him and she could only see his head bobbing up and down near the
surface. The scene then changed to the crowded to hall of an hotel. Her husband left her, and she 'entered into conversation with' a stranger.
"The second half of the dream was discovered in the analysis to represent flight from her husband, and the entering into intimate relations with a
third person, behind whom was plainly indicated Mr. X's brother, mentioned in a former dream. The first part of the dream was a fairly evident
birth-phantasy. In dreams, as in mythology, the delivery of a child from the uterine waters is commonly represented, by way of distortion, as the
entry of the child into water; among many other instances, the births of Adonis, Osiris, Moses, and Bacchus are well-known illustrations of this.
The bobbing up and down of the head in the water at once recalled to the patient the sensation of quickening which she had experienced in her
only pregnancy. Thinking of the boy going into the water induced a reverie in which she saw herself taking him out of the water, carrying him
into the nursery, washing and dressing him, and installing him in her household.
"The second half of the dream, therefore, represents thoughts concerning the elopement, which belonged to the first half of the underlying latent
content; the first half of the dream corresponded with the second half of the latent content, the birth phantasy. Besides this inversion in the order,
further inversions took place in each half of the dream. In the first half the child entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the underlying
dream-thoughts the quickening occurred first, and then the child left the water (a double inversion). In the second half her husband left her; in the
dream-thoughts she left her husband."
Another parturition dream is related by Abraham - the dream of a young woman expecting her first confinement: Front one point of the floor of
the room a subterranean channel leads directly into the water (path of parturition - amniotic fluid). She lifts up a trap in the floor, and there
immediately appears a creature dressed in brownish fur, which almost resembles a seal. This creature changes into the dreamer's younger brother,
to whom her relation has always been material in character.
Rank has shown from a number of dreams that parturition-dreams employ the same symbols as micturition-dreams. The erotic stimulus expresses
itself in these dreams as in urethral stimulus. The stratification of meaning in these dreams corresponds with a chance in the significance of the
symbol since childhood.
We may here turn back to the interrupted theme (see chapter III) of the part played by organic, sleep-disturbing stimuli in dream-formation.
Dreams which have come into existence under these influences not only reveal quite frankly the wish-fulfilling tendency, and the character of
convenience-dreams, but they very often display a quite transparent symbolism as well, since waking not infrequently follows a stimulus whose
satisfaction in symbolic disguise has already been vainly attempted in the dream. This is true of emission dreams as well as those evoked by the
need to urinate or defecate. The peculiar character of emission dreams permits us directly to unmask certain sexual symbols already recognized as
typical, but nevertheless violently disputed, and it also convinces us that many an apparently innocent dream-situation is merely the symbolic
prelude to a crudely sexual scene. This, however, finds direct representation, as a rule, only in the comparatively infrequent emission dreams,
while it often enough turns into an anxiety-dream, which likewise leads to waking.
The symbolism of dreams due to urethral stimulus is especially obvious, and has always been divined. Hippocrates had already advanced the
theory that a disturbance of the bladder was indicated if one dreamt of fountains and springs (Havelock Ellis). Scherner, who has studied the
manifold symbolism of the urethral stimulus, agrees that "the powerful urethral stimulus always turns into the stimulation of the sexual sphere and
its symbolic imagery.... The dream due to urethral stimulus is often at the same time the representative of the sexual dream."
O. Rank, whose conclusions (in his paper on Die Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum) I have here followed, argues very plausibly that a large
number of "dreams due to urethral stimulus" are really caused by sexual stimuli, which at first seek to gratify themselves by way of regression to
the infantile form of urethral erotism. Those cases are especially instructive in which the urethral stimulus thus produced leads to waking and the
emptying of the bladder, whereupon, in spite of this relief, the dream is continued, and expresses its need in undisguisedly erotic images.[73] -
In a quite analogous manner dreams due to intestinal stimulus disclose the pertinent symbolism, and thus confirm the relation, which is also
amply verified by ethno-psychology, of gold and feces. [74] "Thus, for example, a woman, at a time when she is under the care of a physician on
account of an intestinal disorder, dreams of a digger for hidden treasure who is burying a treasure in the vicinity of a little wooden shed which
looks like a rural privy. A second part of the dream has as its content how she wipes the posterior of her child, a little girl, who has soiled herself."
-
Dreams of rescue are connected with parturition dreams. To rescue, especially to rescue from the water, is, when dreamed by a woman,
equivalent to giving birth; this sense is, however, modified when the dreamer is a man.[75] -
Robbers, burglars, and ghosts, of which we are afraid before going to bed, and which sometimes even disturb our sleep, originate in one and the
same childish reminiscence. They are the nightly visitors who have waked the child in order to set it on the chamber, so that it may not wet the
bed, or have lifted the coverlet in order to see clearly how the child is holding its hands while sleeping. I have been able to induce an exact 
recollection of the nocturnal visitor in the analysis of some of these anxiety dreams. The robbers were always the father; the ghosts more probably
correspond to female persons in white night-gowns.
F. Examples - Arithmetic and Speech in Dreams
Before I proceed to assign to its proper place the fourth of the factors which control the formation of dreams, I shall cite a few examples from my
collection of dreams, partly for the purpose of illustrating the co-operation of the three factors with which we are already acquainted, and partly
for the purpose of adducing evidence for certain unsupported assertions which have been made, or of bringing out what necessarily follows from
them. It has, of course, been difficult in the foregoing account of the dream-work to demonstrate my conclusions by means of examples.
Examples in support of isolated statements are convincing only when considered in the context of an interpretation of a dream as a whole; when
they are wrested from their context, they lose their value; on the other hand, a dream-interpretation, even when it is by no means profound, soon
becomes so extensive that it obscures the thread of the discussion which it is intended to illustrate. This technical consideration must be my
excuse if I now proceed to mix together all sorts of things which have nothing in common except their reference to the text of the foregoing
chapter.
We shall first consider a few examples of very peculiar or unusual methods of representation in dreams. A lady dreamed as follows: A servantgirl is standing on a ladder as though to clean the windows, and has with her a chimpanzee and a gorilla cat (later corrected, angora cat). She
throws the animals on to the dreamer; the chimpanzee nestles up to her, and this is very disgusting. This dream has accomplished its purpose by a
very simple means, namely, by taking a mere figure of speech literally, and representing it in accordance with the literal meaning of its words.
Monkey, like the names of animals in general, is an opprobrious epithet, and the situation of the dream means merely to hurl invectives. This
same collection will soon furnish us with further examples of the employment of this simple artifice in the dream-work.
Another dream proceeds in a very similar manner: A woman with a child which has a conspicuously deformed cranium; the dreamer has heard
that the child acquired this deformity owing to its position in its mother's womb. The doctor says that the cranium might be given a better shape
by means of compression, but that this would injure the brain. She thinks that because it is a boy it won't suffer so much from deformity. This
dream contains a plastic representation of the abstract concept: Childish impressions, with which the dreamer has become familiar in the course of
the treatment.
In the following example the dream-work follows rather a different course. The dream contains a recollection of an excursion to the Hilmteich,
near Graz: There is a terrible storm outside; a miserable hotel - the water is dripping from the walls, and the beds are damp. (The latter part of the
content was less directly expressed than I give it.) The dream signifies superfluous. The abstract idea occurring in the dream-thoughts is first
made equivocal by a certain abuse of language; it has perhaps been replaced by overflowing, or by fluid and super-fluid (-fluous), and has then
been brought to representation by an accumulation of like impressions. Water within, water without, water in the beds in the form of dampness -
everything fluid and super fluid. That for the purposes of dream-representation the spelling is much less considered than the sound of words ought
not to surprise us when we remember that rhyme exercises a similar privilege.
The fact that language has at its disposal a great number of words which were originally used in a pictorial and concrete sense, but are at present
used in a colourless and abstract fashion, has, in certain other cases, made it very easy for the dream to represent its thoughts. The dream has only
to restore to these words their full significance, or to follow their change of meaning a little way back. For example, a man dreams that his friend,
who is struggling to get out of a very tight place, calls upon him for help. The analysis shows that the tight place is a hole, and that the dreamer
symbolically uses these very words to his friend: "Be careful, or you'll get yourself into a hole."[76] Another dreamer climbs a mountain from
which he obtains an extraordinarily extensive view. He identifies himself with his brother, who is editing a review dealing with the Far East.
In a dream in Der Grune Heinrich, a spirited horse is plunging about in a field of the finest oats, every grain of which is really "a sweet almond, a
raisin and a new penny" wrapped in red silk and tied with a bit of pig's bristle." The poet (or the dreamer) immediately furnishes the meaning of
this dream, for the horse felt himself pleasantly tickled, so that he exclaimed: "The oats are pricking me" ("I feel my oats").
In the old Norse sagas (according to Henzen) prolific use is made in dreams of colloquialisms and witty expressions; one scarcely finds a dream
without a double meaning or a play upon words.
It would be a special undertaking to collect such methods of representation and to arrange them in accordance with the principles upon which
they are based. Some of the representations are almost witty. They give one the impression that one would have never guessed their meaning if
the dreamer himself had not succeeded in explaining it.
1. A man dreams that he is asked for a name, which, however, he cannot recall. He himself explains that this means: "I shouldn't dream of it."
2. A female patient relates a dream in which all the persons concerned were singularly large. "That means," she adds, "that it must deal with an
episode of my early childhood, for at that time all grown-up people naturally seemed to me immensely large." She herself did not appear in the
dream. 
The transposition into childhood is expressed differently in other dreams - by the translation of time into space. One sees persons and scenes as
though at a great distance, at the end of a long road, or as though one were looking at them through the wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses.
3. A man who in waking life shows an inclination to employ abstract and indefinite expressions, but who otherwise has his wits about him,
dreams, in a certain connection, that he reaches a railway station just as a train is coming in. But then the platform moves towards the train, which
stands still; an absurd inversion of the real state of affairs. This detail, again, is nothing more than an indication to the effect that something else in
the dream must be inverted. The analysis of the same dream leads to recollections of picture-books in which men were represented standing on
their heads and walking on their hands.
4. The same dreamer, on another occasion, relates a short dream which almost recalls the technique of a rebus. His uncle gives him a kiss in an
automobile. He immediately adds the interpretation, which would never have occurred to me: it means auto-erotism. In the waking state this
might have been said in jest.
5. At a New Year's Eve dinner the host, the patriarch of the family, ushered in the New Year with a speech. One of his sons-in-law, a lawyer, was
not inclined to take the old man seriously, especially when in the course of his speech he expressed himself as follows: "When I open the ledger
for the Old Year and glance at its pages I see everything on the asset side and nothing, thank the Lord, on the side of liability; all you children
have been a great asset, none of you a liability." On hearing this the young lawyer thought of X, his wife's brother, who was a cheat and a liar, and
whom he had recently extricated from the entanglements of the law. That night, in a dream. he saw the New Year's celebration once more, and
heard the speech, or rather saw it. Instead of speaking, the old man actually opened the ledger, and on the side marked assets he saw his name
amongst others, but on the other side, marked liability, there was the name of his brother-in-law, X. However, the word liability was changed into
Lie-Ability, which he regarded as X's main characteristic.[77]
6. A dreamer treats another person for a broken bone. The analysis shows that the fracture represents a broken marriage vow, etc.
7. In the dream-content the time of day often represents a certain period of the dreamer's childhood. Thus, for example, 5:15 a.m. means to one
dreamer the age of five years and three months; when he was that age, a younger brother was born.
8. Another representation of age in a dream: A woman is walking with two little girls; there is a difference of fifteen months in their ages. The
dreamer cannot think of any family of her acquaintance in which this is the case. She herself interprets it to mean that the two children represent
her own person, and that the dream reminds her that the two traumatic events of her childhood were separated by this period of time 3 1/2 and 4
3/4 years).
9. It is not astonishing that persons who are undergoing psycho-analytic treatment frequently dream of it, and are compelled to give expression in
their dreams to all the thoughts and expectations aroused by it. The image chosen for the treatment is as a rule that of a journey, usually in a motorcar, this being a modern and complicated vehicle; in the reference to the speed of the car the patient's ironical humour is given free play. If the
unconscious, as an element of waking thought, is to be represented in the dream, it is replaced, appropriately enough, by subterranean localities,
which at other times, when there is no reference to analytic treatment, have represented the female body or the womb. Below in the dream very
often refers to the genitals, and its opposite, above, to the face, mouth or breast. By wild beasts the dream-work usually symbolizes passionate
impulses; those of the dreamer, and also those of other persons of whom the dreamer is afraid; or thus, by means of a very slight displacement,
the persons who experience these passions. From this it is not very far to the totemistic representation of the dreaded father by means of vicious
animals, dogs, wild horses, etc. One might say that wild beasts serve to represent the libido, feared by the ego, and combated by repression. Even
the neurosis itself, the sick person, is often separated from the dreamer and exhibited in the dream as an independent person.
One may go so far as to say that the dream-work makes use of all the means accessible to it for the visual representation of the dream-thoughts,
whether these appear admissible or inadmissible to waking criticism, and thus exposes itself to the doubt as well as the derision of all those who
have only hearsay knowledge of dream-interpretation, but have never themselves practised it. Stekel's book, Die Sprache des Traumes, is
especially rich in such examples, but I avoid citing illustrations from this work as the author's lack of critical judgment and his arbitrary technique
would make even the unprejudiced observer feel doubtful.
10. From an essay by V. Tausk ("Kleider und Farben in Dienste der Traumdarstellung," in Interna. Zeitschr. fur Ps. A., ii [1914]):
(a) A dreams that he sees his former governess wearing a dress of black lustre, which fits closely over her buttocks. That means he declares this
woman to be lustful.
(b) C in a dream sees a girl on the road to X bathed in a white light and wearing a white blouse.
The dreamer began an affair with a Miss White on this road. 
11. In an analysis which I carried out in the French language I had to interpret a dream in which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally had to ask
why I was thus represented: "Vous me trompez," answered the dreamer (Trompe = trunk).
The dream-work often succeeds in representing very refractory material, such as proper names, by means of the forced exploitation of very
remote relations. In one of my dreams old Brucke has set me a task. I make a preparation, and pick something out of it which looks like crumpled
tinfoil. (I shall return to this dream later.) The corresponding association, which is not easy to find, is stanniol, and now I know that I have in
mind the name of the author Stannius, which appeared on the title-page of a treatise on the nervous system of fishes, which in my youth I
regarded with reverence. The first scientific problem which my teacher set me did actually relate to the nervous system of a fish - the
Ammocoetes. Obviously, this name could not be utilized in the picture-puzzle.
Here I must not fail to include a dream with a curious content, which is worth noting also as the dream of a child, and which is readily explained
by analysis: A lady tells me: "I can remember that when I was a child I repeatedly dreamed that God wore a conical paper hat on His head. They
often used to make me wear such a hat at table, so that I shouldn't be able to look at the plates of the other children and see how much they had
received of any particular dish. Since I had heard that God was omniscient, the dream signified that I knew everything in spite of the hat which I
was made to wear."
What the dream-work consists in, and its unceremonious handling of its material, the dream-thoughts, may be shown in an instructive manner by
the numbers and calculations which occur in dreams. Superstition, by the way, regards numbers as having a special significance in dreams. I shall
therefore give a few examples of this kind from my collection.
1. From the dream of a lady, shortly before the end of her treatment:
She wants to pay for something or other; her daughter takes 3 florins 65 kreuzer from her purse; but the mother says: "What are you doing? It
costs only 21 kreuzer." This fragment of the dream was intelligible without further explanation owing to my knowledge of the dreamer's
circumstances. The lady was a foreigner, who had placed her daughter at school in Vienna, and was able to continue my treatment as long as her
daughter remained in the city. In three weeks the daughter's scholastic year would end, and the treatment would then stop. On the day before the
dream the principal of the school had asked her whether she could not decide to leave the child at school for another year. She had then obviously
reflected that in this case she would be able to continue the treatment for another year. Now, this is what the dream refers to, for a year is equal to
365 days; the three weeks remaining before the end of the scholastic year, and of the treatment, are equivalent to 21 days (though not to so many
hours of treatment). The numerals, which in the dream-thoughts refer to periods of time, are given money values in the dream, and simultaneously
a deeper meaning finds expression - for time is money. 365 kreuzer, of course, are 3 florins 65 kreuzer. The smallness of the sums which appear
in the dream is a self-evident wish-fulfilment; the wish has reduced both the cost of the treatment and the year's school fees.
2. In another dream the numerals are involved in even more complex relations. A young lady, who has been married for some years, learns that an
acquaintance of hers, of about the same age, Elise L, has just become engaged. Thereupon she dreams: She is sitting in the theatre with her
husband and one side of the stalls is quite empty. Her husband tells her that Elise L and her fiance had also wished to come to the theatre, but that
they only could have obtained poor seats; three for 1 florin 50 kreuzer, and of course they could not take those. She thinks they didn't lose much,
either.
What is the origin of the 1 florin 50 kreuzer? A really indifferent incident of the previous day. The dreamer's sister-in-law had received 150
florins as a present from her husband, and hastened to get rid of them by buying some jewellery. Let us note that 150 florins is 100 times 1 florin
50 kreuzer. But whence the 3 in connection with the seats in the theatre? There is only one association for this, namely, that the fiance is three
months younger than herself. When we have ascertained the significance of the fact that one side of the stalls is empty we have the solution of the
dream. This feature is an undisguised allusion to a little incident which had given her husband a good excuse for teasing her. She had decided to
go to the theatre that week; she had been careful to obtain tickets a few days beforehand, and had had to pay the advance booking-fee. When they
got to the theatre they found that one side of the house was almost empty; so that she certainly need not have been in such a hurry.
I shall now substitute the dream-thoughts for the dream: "It surely was nonsense to marry so early; there was no need for my being in such a
hurry. From Elise L's example I see that I should have got a husband just the same - and one a hundred times better - If I had only waited
(antithesis to the haste of her sister-in-law), I could have bought three such men for the money (the dowry)!" - Our attention is drawn to the fact
that the numerals in this dream have changed their meanings and their relations to a much greater extent than in the. one previously considered.
The transforming and distorting activity of the dream has in this case been greater - a fact which we interpret as meaning that these dreamthoughts had to overcome an unusual degree of endo-psychic resistance before they attained to representation. And we must not overlook the fact
that the dream contains an absurd element, namely, that two persons are expected to take three seats. It will throw some light on the question of
the interpretation of absurdity in dreams if I remark that this absurd detail of the dream-content is intended to represent the most strongly
emphasized of the dream-thoughts: "It was nonsense to marry so early." The figure 3, which occurs in a quite subordinate relation between the
two persons compared (three months' difference in their ages), has thus been adroitly utilized to produce the idea of nonsense required by the
dream. The reduction of the actual 150 florins to 1 florin 50 kreuzer corresponds to the dreamer's disparagement of her husband in her suppressed
thoughts. 
3. Another example displays the arithmetical powers of dreams, which have brought them into such disrepute. A man dreams: He is sitting in the
B's house (the B's are a family with which he was formerly acquainted), and he says: "It was nonsense that you didn't give me Amy for my wife."
Thereupon, he asks the girl: "How old are you?" Answer: "I was born in 1882." "Ah, then you are 28 years old."
Since the dream was dreamed in the year 1898, this is obviously bad arithmetic, and the inability of the dreamer to calculate may, if it cannot be
otherwise explained, be likened to that of a general paralytic. My patient was one of those men who cannot help thinking about every woman they
see. The patient who for some months came next after him in my consulting-room was a young lady; he met this lady after he had constantly
asked about her, and he was very anxious to make a good impression on her. This was the lady whose age he estimated at 28. So much for
explaining the result of his apparent calculation. But 1882 was the year in which he had married. He had been unable to refrain from entering into
conversation with the two other women whom he met at my house - the two by no means youthful maids who alternately opened the door to him -
and as he did not find them very responsive, he had told himself that they probably regarded him as elderly and serious.
Bearing in mind these examples, and others of a similar nature (to follow), we may say: The dream-work does not calculate at all, whether
correctly or incorrectly; it only strings together, in the form of a sum, numerals which occur in the dream-thoughts, and which may serve as
allusions to material which is insusceptible of representation. It thus deals with figures, as material for expressing its intentions, just as it deals
with all other concepts, and with names and speeches which are only verbal images.
For the dream-work cannot compose a new speech. No matter how many speeches; and answers, which may in themselves be sensible or absurd,
may occur in dreams, analysis shows us that the dream has taken from the dream-thoughts fragments of speeches which have really been
delivered or heard, and has dealt with them in the most arbitrary fashion. It has not only torn them from their context and mutilated them,
accepting one fragment and rejecting another, but it has often fitted them together in a novel manner, so that the speech which seems coherent in a
dream is dissolved by analysis into three or four components. In this new application of the words the dream has often ignored the meaning which
they had in the dream-thoughts, and has drawn an entirely new meaning from them.[78] Upon closer inspection, the more distinct and compact
ingredients of the dream-speech may be distinguished from others, which serve as connectives, and have probably been supplied, just as we
supply omitted letters and syllables in reading. The dream-speech thus has the structure of breccia, in which the larger pieces of various material
are held together by a solidified cohesive medium.
Neurosis behaves in the same fashion. I know a patient who - involuntarily and unwillingly - hears (hallucinates) songs or fragments of songs
without being able to understand their significance for her psychic life. She is certainly not a paranoiac. Analysis shows that by exercising a
certain license she gave the text of these songs a false application. "Oh, thou blissful one! Oh, thou happy one!" This is the first line of Christmas
carol, but by not continuing it to the word, Christmastide, she turns it into a bridal song, etc. The same mechanism of distortion may operate,
without hallucination, merely in association.
Strictly speaking, of course, this description is correct only for those dream-speeches which have something of the sensory character of a speech,
and are described as speeches. The others, which have not, as it were, been perceived as heard or spoken (which have no accompanying acoustic
or motor emphasis in the dream) are simply thoughts, such as occur in our waking life, and find their way unchanged into many of our dreams.
Our reading, too, seems to provide an abundant and not easily traceable source for the indifferent speech-material of dreams. But anything that is
at all conspicuous as a speech in a dream can be referred to actual speeches which have been made or heard by the dreamer.
We have already found examples of the derivation of such dream-speeches in the analyses of dreams which have been cited for other purposes.
Thus, in the innocent market-dream (chapter V., A.) where the speech: That is no longer to be had serves to identify me with the butcher, while a
fragment of the other speech: I don't know that, I don't take that, precisely fulfils the task of rendering the dream innocent. On the previous day,
the dreamer, replying to some unreasonable demand on the part of her cook, had waved her aside with the words: I don't know that, behave
yourself properly, and she afterwards took into the dream the first, indifferent-sounding part of the speech in order to allude to the latter part,
which fitted well into the phantasy underlying the dream, but which might also have betrayed it.
Here is one of many examples which all lead to the same conclusion:
A large courtyard in which dead bodies are being burned. The dreamer says, "I'm going, I can't stand the sight of it." (Not a distinct speech.) Then
he meets two butcher boys and asks, "Well, did it taste good?" And one of them answers, "No, it wasn't good." As though it had been human
flesh.
The innocent occasion of this dream is as follows: After taking supper with his wife, the dreamer pays a visit to his worthy but by no means
appetizing neighbour. The hospitable old lady is just sitting down to her own supper, and presses him (among men a composite, sexually
significant word is used jocosely in the place of this word) to taste it. He declines, saying that he has no appetite. She replies: "Go on with you,
you can manage it all right," or something of the kind. The dreamer is thus forced to taste and praise what is offered him. "But that's good!" When
he is alone again with his wife, he complains of his neighbour's importunity, and of the quality of the food which he has tasted. "I can't stand the
sight of it," a phrase that in the dream, too, does not emerge as an actual speech, is a thought relating to the physical charms of the lady who
invites him, which may be translated by the statement that he has no desire to look at her. 
The analysis of another dream - which I will cite at this stage for the sake of a very distinct speech, which constitutes its nucleus, but which will
be explained only when we come to evaluate the affects in dreams - is more instructive. I dream very vividly: I have gone to Brucke's laboratory
at night, and on hearing a gentle knocking at the door, I open it to (the deceased) Professor Fleischl, who enters in the company of several
strangers, and after saying a few words sits down at his table. Then follows a second dream: My friend Fl has come to Vienna, unobtrusively, in
July; I meet him in the street, in conversation with my (deceased) friend P, and I go with them somewhere, and they sit down facing each other as
though at a small table, while I sit facing them at the narrow end of the table. Fl speaks of his sister, and says: "In three-quarters of an hour she
was dead," and then something like "That is the threshold." As P does not understand him, Fl turns to me, and asks me how much I have told P of
his affairs. At this, overcome by strange emotions, I try to tell Fl that P (cannot possibly know anything, of course, because he) is not alive. But
noticing the mistake myself, I say: "Non vixit." Then I look searchingly at P, and under my gaze he becomes pale and blurred, and his eyes turn a
sickly blue - and at last he dissolves. I rejoice greatly at this; I now understand that Ernst Fleischl, too, is only an apparition, a revenant, and I find
that it is quite possible that such a person should exist only so long as one wishes him to, and that he can be made to disappear by the wish of
another person.
This very pretty dream unites so many of the enigmatical characteristics of the dream-content - the criticism made in the dream itself, inasmuch as
I myself notice my mistake in saying Non vixit instead of Non vivit, the unconstrained intercourse with deceased persons, whom the dream itself
declares to be dead, the absurdity of my conclusion, and the intense satisfaction which it gives me - that "I would give my life" to expound the
complete solution of the problem. But in reality I am incapable of doing what I do in the dream, i.e., of sacrificing such intimate friends to my
ambition. And if I attempted to disguise the facts, the true meaning of the dream, with which I am perfectly familiar, would be spoiled. I must
therefore be content to select a few of the elements of the dream for interpretation, some here, and some at a later stage.
The scene in which I annihilate P with a glance forms the centre of the dream. His eyes become strange and weirdly blue, and then he dissolves.
This scene is an unmistakable imitation of a scene that was actually experienced. I was a demonstrator at the Physiological Institute; I was on
duty in the morning, and Brucke learned that on several occasions I had been unpunctual in my attendance at the students' laboratory. One
morning, therefore, he arrived at the hour of opening, and waited for me. What he said to me was brief and to the point; but it was not what he
said that mattered. What overwhelmed me was the terrible gaze of his blue eyes, before which I melted away - as P does in the dream, for P has
exchanged roles with me, much to my relief. Anyone who remembers the eyes of the great master, which were wonderfully beautiful even in his
old age, and has ever seen him angered, will readily imagine the emotions of the young transgressor on that occasion.
But for a long while I was unable to account for the Non vixit with which I pass sentence in the dream. Finally, I remembered that the reason why
these two words were so distinct in the dream was not because they were heard or spoken, but because they were seen. Then I knew at once where
they came from. On the pedestal of the statue of the Emperor joseph in the Vienna Hofburg are inscribed the following beautiful words:
Saluti patriae vixit
non diu sed totus.[79]
[He lived for the safety of the public, not for a long time, but always.] The motive of the mistake: patriae [fatherland] for publicae, has probably
been correctly divined by Wittels.
From this inscription I had taken what fitted one inimical train of thought in my dream-thoughts, and which was intended to mean: "That fellow
has nothing to say in the matter, he is not really alive." And I now recalled that the dream was dreamed a few days after the unveiling of the
memorial to Fleischl, in the cloisters of the University, upon which occasion I had once more seen the memorial to Brucke, and must have
thought with regret (in the unconscious) how my gifted friend P, with all his devotion to science, had by his premature death forfeited his just
claim to a memorial in these halls. So I set up this memorial to him in the dream; Josef is my friend P's baptismal name.[80]
According to the rules of dream-interpretation, I should still not be justified in replacing non vivit, which I need, by non vixit, which is placed at
my disposal by the recollection of the Kaiser Josef memorial. Some other element of the dream-thoughts must have contributed to make this
possible. Something now calls my attention to the fact that in the dream scene two trains of thought relating to my friend P meet, one hostile, the
other affectionate - the former on the surface, the latter covered up - and both are given representation in the same words: non vixit. As my friend
P has deserved well of science, I erect a memorial to him; as he has been guilty of a malicious wish (expressed at the end of the dream), I
annihilate him. I have here constructed a sentence with a special cadence, and in doing so I must have been influenced by some existing model.
But where can I find a similar antithesis, a similar parallel between two opposite reactions to the same person, both of which can claim to be
wholly justified, and which nevertheless do not attempt to affect one another? Only in one passage which, however, makes a profound impression
upon the reader - Brutus's speech of justification in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar: "As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I
rejoice at it; as he was valiant. I honour him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him." Have we not here the same verbal structure, and the same
antithesis of thought, as in the dream-thoughts? So I am playing Brutus in my dream. If only I could find in my dream-thoughts another collateral
connection to confirm this! I think it might be the following: My friend Fl comes to Vienna in July. This detail is not the case in reality. To my
knowledge, my friend has never been in Vienna in July. But the month of July is named after Julius Caesar, and might therefore very well furnish
the required allusion to the intermediate thought - that I am playing the part of Brutus.[81] - 
Strangely enough, I once did actually play the part of Brutus. When I was a boy of fourteen, I presented the scene between Brutus and Caesar in
Schiller's poem to an audience of children: with the assistance of my nephew, who was a year older than I, and who had come to us from England -
and was thus a revenant - for in him I recognized the playmate of my early childhood. Until the end of my third year we had been inseparable; we
had loved each other and fought each other and, as I have already hinted, this childish relation has determined all my later feelings in my
intercourse with persons of my own age. My nephew John has since then had many incarnations, which have revivified first one and then another
aspect of a character that is ineradicably fixed in my unconscious memory. At times he must have treated me very badly, and I must have opposed
my tyrant courageously, for in later years I was often told of a short speech in which I defended myself when my father - his grandfather - called
me to account: "Why did you hit John?" "I hit him because he hit me." It must be this childish scene which causes non vivit to become non vixit,
for in the language of later childhood striking is known as wichsen (German: wichsen = to polish, to wax, i.e., to thrash); and the dream-work
does not disdain to take advantage of such associations. My hostility towards my friend P, which has so little foundation in reality - he was
greatly my superior, and might therefore have been a new edition of my old playmate - may certainly be traced to my complicated relations with
John during our childhood. I shall, as I have said, return to this dream later on. 
Hitherto, in our interpretation of dreams, we have come upon the element of absurdity in the dream-content so frequently that we must no longer
postpone the investigation of its cause and its meaning. We remember, of course, that the absurdity of dreams has furnished the opponents of
dream-interpretation with their chief argument for regarding the dream as merely the meaningless product of an attenuated and fragmentary
activity of the psyche.
I will begin with a few examples in which the absurdity of the dream-content is apparent only, disappearing when the dream is more thoroughly
examined. These are certain dreams which - accidently [sic], one begins by thinking - are concerned with the dreamer's dead father.
1. Here is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six years before the date of the dream:
His father had been involved in a terrible accident. He was travelling by the night express when the train was derailed, the seats were telescoped,
and his head was crushed from side to side. The dreamer sees him lying on his bed; from his left eyebrow a wound runs vertically upwards. The
dreamer is surprised that his father should have met with an accident (since he is dead already, as the dreamer adds in relating his dream). His
father's eyes are so clear.
According to the prevailing standards of dream-criticism, this dream-content would be explained as follows: At first, while the dreamer is
picturing his father's accident, he has forgotten that his father has already been many years in his grave; in the course of the dream this memory
awakens, so that he is surprised at his own dream even while he is dreaming it. Analysis, however, tells us that it is quite superfluous to seek for
such explanations. The dreamer had commissioned a sculptor to make a bust of his father, and he had inspected the bust two days before the
dream. It is this which seems to him to have come to grief (the German word means gone wrong or met with an accident). The sculptor has never
seen his father, and has had to work from photographs. On the very day before the dream the son had sent an old family servant to the studio in
order to see whether he, too, would pass the some judgment upon the marble bust - namely, that it was too narrow between the temples. And now
follows the memory-material which has contributed to the formation of the dream: The dreamer's father had a habit, whenever he was harassed by
business cares or domestic difficulties, of pressing his temples between his hands, as though his head was growing too large and be was trying to
compress it. When the dreamer was four years old, he was present when a pistol was accidentally discharged, and his father's eyes were blackened
(his eyes are so clear). When his father was thoughtful or depressed, he had a deep furrow in his forehead just where the dream shows his wound.
The fact that in the dream this wrinkle is replaced by a wound points to the second occasion for the dream. The dreamer had taken a photograph
of his little daughter; the plate had fallen from his hand, and when he picked it up it revealed a crack which ran like a vertical furrow across the
child's forehead, extending as far as the eyebrow. He could not help feeling a superstitious foreboding, for on the day before his mother's death
the negative of her portrait had been cracked.
Thus, the absurdity of this dream is simply the result of a carelessness of verbal expression, which does not distinguish between the bust or the
photograph and the original. We are all accustomed to making remarks like: "Don't you think it's exactly your father?" The appearance of
absurdity in this dream might, of course, have been easily avoided. If it were permissible to form an opinion on the strength of a single case, one
might be tempted to say that this semblance of absurdity is admitted or even desired.
II.
Here is another example of the same kind from my own dreams (I lost my father in the year 1896):
After his death, my father has played a part in the political life of the Magyars, and has united them into a political whole; and here I see,
indistinctly, a little picture: a number of men, as though in the Reichstag; a man is standing on one or two chairs; there are others round about 
him. I remember that on his deathbed he looked so like Garibaldi, and I am glad that this promise has really come true.
Certainly this is absurd enough. It was dreamed at the time when the Hungarians were in a state of anarchy, owing to Parliamentary obstruction,
and were passing through the crisis from which Koloman Szell subsequently delivered them. The trivial circumstance that the scenes beheld in
dreams consist of such little pictures is not without significance for the elucidation of this element. The customary visual dream-representations of
our thoughts present images that impress us as being life-size; my dream-picture, however, is the reproduction of a wood-cut inserted in the text
of an illustrated history of Austria, representing Maria Theresa in the Reichstag of Pressburg - the famous scene of Moriamur pro rege nostro.[82]
Like Maria Theresa, my father, in my dream, is surrounded by the multitude; but he is standing on one or two chairs (Stuhlen), and is thus, like a
Stuhlrichter (presiding judge). (He has united them; here the intermediary is the phrase: "We shall need no judge.") Those of us who stood about
my father's death-bed did actually notice that he looked very like Garibaldi. He had a post-mortem rise of temperature; his cheeks shone redder
and redder... involuntarily we continue: "And behind him, in unsubstantial (radiance), lay that which subdues us all - the common fate."
This uplifting of our thoughts prepares us for the fact that we shall have to deal with this common fate. The post-mortem rise in temperature
corresponds to the words after his death in the dream-content. The most agonizing of his afflictions had been a complete paralysis of the intestines
(obstruction) during the last few weeks of his life. All sorts of disrespectful thoughts associate themselves with this. One of my contemporaries,
who lost his father while still at the Gymnasium - upon which occasion I was profoundly moved, and tendered him my friendship - once told me,
derisively, of the distress of a relative whose father had died in the street, and had been brought home, when it appeared, upon undressing the
corpse, that at the moment of death, or post-mortem, an evacuation of the bowels (Stuhlentleerung) had taken place. The daughter was deeply
distressed by this circumstance, because this ugly detail would inevitably spoil her memory of her father. We have now penetrated to the wish
that is embodied in this dream. To stand after one's death before one's children great and undefiled: who would not wish that? What now has
become of the absurdity of this dream? The appearance of absurdity was due only to the fact that a perfectly permissible figure of speech, in
which we are accustomed to ignore any absurdity that may exist as between its components, has been faithfully represented in the dream. Here
again we can hardly deny that the appearance of absurdity is desired and has been purposely produced.
The frequency with which dead persons appear in our dreams as living and active and associating with us has evoked undue astonishment, and
some curious explanations, which afford conspicuous proof of our misunderstanding of dreams. And yet the explanation of these dreams is close
at hand. How often it happens that we say to ourselves: "If my father were still alive, what would he say to this?" The dream can express this if in
no other way than by his presence in a definite situation. Thus, for instance, a young man whose grandfather has left him a great inheritance
dreams that the old man is alive, and calls his grandson to account, reproaching him for his lavish expenditure. What we regard as an objection to
the dream on account of our better knowledge that the man is already dead, is in reality the consoling thought that the dead man does not need to
learn the truth, or satisfaction over the fact that he can no longer have a say in the matter.
Another form of absurdity found in dreams of deceased relatives does not express scorn and derision; it serves to express the extremest
repudiation, the representation of a suppressed thought which one would like to believe the very last thing one would think of. Dreams of this
kind appear to be capable of solution only if we remember that a dream makes no distinction between desire and reality. For example, a man who
nursed his father during his last illness, and who felt his death very keenly, dreamed some time afterwards the following senseless dream: His
father was again living, and conversing with him as usual, but (and this was the remarkable thing) he had nevertheless died, though he did not
know it. This dream is intelligible if, after he had nevertheless died, we insert in consequence of the dreamer's wish, and if after but he did not
know it, we add that the dreamer had entertained this wish. While nursing him, the son had often wished that his father was dead; that is, he had
had the really compassionate thought that it would be a good thing if death would at last put an end to his sufferings. While he was mourning his
father's death, even this compassionate wish became an unconscious reproach, as though it had really contributed to shorten the sick man's life.
By the awakening of the earliest infantile feelings against his father, it became possible to express this reproach as a dream; and it was precisely
because of the extreme antithesis between the dream-instigator and the day - thoughts that this dream had to assume so absurd a form.[83]
As a general thing, the dreams of a deceased person of whom the dreamer has been fond confront the interpreter with difficult problems, the
solution of which is not always satisfying. The reason for this may be sought in the especially pronounced ambivalence of feeling which controls
the relation of the dreamer to the dead person. In such dreams it is quite usual for the deceased person to be treated at first as living; then it
suddenly appears that he is dead; and in the continuation of the dream he is once more living. This has a confusing effect. I at last divined that this
alternation of death and life is intended to represent the indifference of the dreamer ("It is all one to me whether he is alive or dead"). This
indifference, of course, is not real, but wished; its purpose is to help the dreamer to deny his very intense and often contradictory emotional
attitudes, and so it becomes the dream-representation of his ambivalence. For other dreams in which one meets with deceased persons the
following rule will often be a guide: If in the dream the dreamer is not reminded that the dead person is dead, he sets himself on a par with the
dead; he dreams of his own death. The sudden realization or astonishment in the dream ("but he has long been dead!") is a protest against this
identification, and rejects the meaning that the dreamer is dead. But I will admit that I feel that dream-interpretation is far from having elicited all
the secrets of dreams having this content.
III.
In the example which I shall now cite, I can detect the dream-work in the act of purposely manufacturing an absurdity for which there is no
occasion whatever in the dream-material. It is taken from the dream which I had as a result of meeting Count Thun just before going away on a 
holiday. I am driving in a cab, and I tell the driver to drive to a railway station. "Of course, I can't drive with you on the railway track itself," I say,
after the driver had reproached me, as though I had worn him out; at the same time, it seems as though I had already made with him a journey that
one usually makes by train. Of this confused and senseless story analysis gives the following explanation: During the day I had hired a cab to take
me to a remote street in Dornbach. The driver, however, did not know the way, and simply kept on driving, in the manner of such worthy people,
until I became aware of the fact and showed him the way, indulging in a few derisive remarks. From this driver a train of thought led to the
aristocratic personage whom I was to meet later on. For the present, I will only remark that one thing that strikes us middle-class plebeians about
the aristocracy is that they like to put themselves in the driver's seat. Does not Count Thun guide the Austrian car of State? The next sentence in
the dream, however, refers to my brother, whom I thus also identify with the cab-driver. I had refused to go to Italy with him this year (Of course,
I can't drive with you on the railway track itself), and this refusal was a sort of punishment for his accustomed complaint that I usually wear him
out on this tour (this finds its way into the dream unchanged) by rushing him too quickly from place to place, and making him see too many
beautiful things in a single day. That evening my brother had accompanied me to the railway station, but shortly before the carriage had reached
the Western station of the Metropolitan Railway he had jumped out in order to take the train to Purkersdorf. I suggested to him that he might
remain with me a little longer, as he did not travel to Purkersdorf by the Metropolitan but by the Western Railway. This is why, in my dream, I
made in the cab a journey which one usually makes by train. In reality, however, it was the other way about: what I told my brother was: "The
distance which you travel on the Metropolitan Railway you could travel in my company on the Western Railway" The whole confusion of the
dream is therefore due to the fact that in my dream I replace "Metropolitan Railway" by cab, which, to be sure, does good service in bringing the
driver and my brother into conjunction. I then elicit from the dream some nonsense which is hardly disentangled by elucidation, and which almost
constitutes a contradiction of my earlier speech (of course, I cannot drive with you on the railway track itself). But as I have no excuse whatever
for confronting the Metropolitan Railway with the cab, I must intentionally have given the whole enigmatical story this peculiar form in my
dream.
But with what intention? We shall now learn what the absurdity in the dream signifies, and the motives which admitted it or created it. In this case
the solution of the mystery is as follows: In the dream I need an absurdity, and something incomprehensible, in connection with driving (Fahren =
riding, driving) because in the dream-thoughts I have a certain opinion that demands representation. One evening, at the house of the witty and
hospitable lady who appears, in another scene of the same dream, as the housekeeper, I heard two riddles which I could not solve: As they were
known to the other members of the party, I presented a somewhat ludicrous figure in my unsuccessful attempts to find the solutions. They were
two puns turning on the words Nachkommen (to obey orders - offspring) and Vorfahren (to drive - forefathers, ancestry). They ran, I believe, as
follows:
The coachman does it
At the master's behests;
Everyone has it;
In the grave it rests.
(Vorfahren)
A confusing detail was that the first halves of the two riddles were identical:
The coachman does it
At the master's behests;
Not everyone has it,
In the cradle it rests.
(Nachkommen)
When I saw Count Thun drive up (vorfahren) in state, and fell into the Figaro-like mood, in which one finds that the sole merit of such aristocratic
gentlemen is that they have taken the trouble to be born (to become Nachkommen), these two riddles became intermediary thoughts for the dreamwork. As aristocrats may readily be replaced by coachmen, and since it was once the custom to call a coachman Herr Schwager (brother-in-law),
the work of condensation could involve my brother in the same representation. But the dream-thought at work in the background is as follows: It
is nonsense to be proud of one's ancestors (Vorfahren). I would rather be an ancestor (Vorfahr) myself. On account of this opinion, it is nonsense,
we have the nonsense in the dream. And now the last riddle in this obscure passage of the dream is solved - namely that I have driven before
(vorher gefahren, vorgefaltren) with this driver.
Thus, a dream is made absurd if there occurs in the dream-thoughts, as one of the elements of the contents, the opinion: "That is nonsense"; and,
in general, if criticism and derision are the motives of one of the dreamer's unconscious trains of thought. Hence, absurdity is one of the means by
which the dream-work represents contradiction; another means is the inversion of material relation between the dream-thoughts and the dreamcontent; another is the employment of the feeling of motor inhibition. But the absurdity of a dream is not to be translated by a simple no; it is
intended to reproduce the tendency of the dream-thoughts to express laughter or derision simultaneously with the contradiction. Only with this
intention does the dream-work produce anything ridiculous. Here again it transforms a part of the latent content into a manifest form.[84]
Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet
Und singt er, so sturzt Apollo
Vor ihm auf die Knie und bittet und fleht,
Halt ein, ich werde sonst toll, oh!
As a matter of fact, we have already cited a convincing example of this significance of an absurd dream. The dream (interpreted without analysis)
of the Wagnerian performance which lasted until 7.45 a.m., and in which the orchestra is conducted from a tower, etc. (see this chapter, D.), is
obviously saving: It is a crazy world and an insane society. He who deserves a thing doesn't get it, and he who doesn't care for it does get it. In
this way the dreamer compares her fate with that of her cousin. The fact that dreams of a dead father were the first to furnish us with examples of
absurdity in dreams is by no means accidental. The conditions for the creation of absurd dreams are here grouped together in a typical fashion.
The authority proper to the father has at an early age evoked the criticism of the child, and the strict demands which he has made have caused the
child, in self-defence, to pay particularly close attention to every weakness of his father's; but the piety with which the father's personality is
surrounded in our thoughts, especially after his death, intensifies the censorship which prevents the expression of this criticism from becoming
conscious.
IV.
Here is another absurd dream of a deceased father:
I receive a communication from the town council of my native city concerning the cost of accommodation in the hospital in the year 1851. This
was necessitated by a seizure from which I was suffering. I make fun of the matter for, in the first place, I was not yet born in 1851, and in the
second place, my father, to whom the communication might refer, is already dead. I go to him in the adjoining room, where he is lying in bed, and
tell him about it. To my surprise he remembers that in the year 1851 he was once drink and had to be locked up or confined. It was when he was
working for the firm of T. "Then you, too, used to drink?" I ask. "You married soon after?" I reckon that I was born in 1856, which seems to me
to be immediately afterwards.
In the light of the foregoing exposition, we shall translate the insistence with which this dream exhibits its absurdities as a sure sign of a
particularly embittered and passionate polemic in the dream-thoughts. All the greater, then, is our astonishment when we perceive that in this
dream the polemic is waged openly, and that my father is denoted as the person who is made a laughing-stock. Such frankness seems to contradict
our assumption of a censorship controlling the dream-work. The explanation is that here the father is only an interposed figure, while the quarrel
is really with another person, who appears in the dream only in a single allusion. Whereas a dream usually treats of revolt against other persons,
behind whom the father is concealed, here it is the other way about: the father serves as the man of straw to represent another, and hence the
dream dares to concern itself openly with a person who is usually hallowed, because there is present the certain knowledge that he is not in reality
intended. We learn of this condition of affairs by considering the occasion of the dream. It was dreamed after I had heard that an older colleague,
whose judgment was considered infallible, had expressed disapproval and astonishment on hearing that one of my patients had already been
undergoing psychoanalytic treatment at my hands for five years. The introductory sentences of the dream allude in a transparently disguised
manner to the fact that this colleague had for a time taken over the duties which my father could no longer perform (statement of expenses,
accommodation in the hospital); and when our friendly relations began to alter for the worse I was thrown into the same emotional conflict as that
which arises in the case of a misunderstanding between father and son (by reason of the part played by the father, and his earlier functions). The
dream-thoughts now bitterly resent the reproach that I am not making better progress, which extends itself from the treatment of this patient to
other things. Does my colleague know anyone who can get on any faster? Does he not know that conditions of this sort are usually incurable and
last for life? What are four or five years in comparison to a whole lifetime, especially when life has been made so much easier for the patient
during the treatment?
The impression of absurdity in this dream is brought about largely by the fact that sentences from different divisions of the dream-thoughts are
strung together without any reconciling transition. Thus, the sentence, I go to him it the adjoining room, etc., leaves the subject from which the
preceding sentences are taken, and faithfully reproduces the circumstances under which I told my father that I was engaged to be married. Thus
the dream is trying to remind me of the noble disinterestedness which the old man showed at that time, and to contrast this with the conduct of
another newly-introduced person. I now perceive that the dream is allowed to make fun of my father because in the dream-thoughts, in the full
recognition of his merits, he is held up as an example to others. It is in the nature of every censorship that one is permitted to tell untruths about
forbidden things rather than the truth. The next sentence, to the effect that my father remembers that he was once drink, and was locked up in
consequence, contains nothing that really relates to my father any more. The person who is screened by him is here a no less important personage
than the great Meynert, in whose footsteps I followed with such veneration, and whose attitude towards me, after a short period of favouritism,
changed into one of undisguised hostility. The dream recalls to me his own statement that in his youth he had at one time formed the habit of
intoxicating himself with chloroform, with the result that he had to enter a sanatorium; and also my second experience with him, shortly before
his death. I had an embittered literary controversy with him in reference to masculine hysteria, the existence of which he denied, and when I
visited him during his last illness, and asked him how he felt, he described his condition at some length, and concluded with the words: "You
know, I have always been one of the prettiest cases of masculine hysteria." Thus, to my satisfaction, and to my astonishment, he admitted what he
so long and so stubbornly denied. But the fact that in this scene of my dream I can use my father to screen Meynert is explained not by any
discovered analogy between the two persons, but by the fact that it is the brief yet perfectly adequate representation of a conditional sentence in
the dream-thoughts which, if fully expanded, would read as follows: "Of course, if I belonged to the second generation, if I were the son of a
professor or a privy councillor, I should have progressed more rapidly." In my dream I make my father a professor and a privy councillor. The 
most obvious and most annoying absurdity of the dream lies in the treatment of the date 1851, which seems to me to be indistinguishable from
1856, as though a difference of five years meant nothing whatever. But it is just this one of the dream-thoughts that requires expression. Four or
five years - that is precisely the length of time during which I enjoyed the support of the colleague mentioned at the outset; but it is also the
duration of time I kept my fiance waiting before I married her; and by a coincidence that is eagerly exploited by the dream-thoughts, it is also the
time I have kept my oldest patient waiting for a complete cure. "What are five years?" ask the dream-thoughts. "That is no time at all to me, that
isn't worth consideration. I have time enough ahead of me, and just as what you wouldn't believe came true at last, so I shall accomplish this
also." Moreover, the number 51, when considered apart from the number of the century, is determined in yet another manner and in an opposite
sense; for which reason it occurs several times over in the dream. It is the age at which man seems particularly exposed to danger; the age at
which I have seen colleagues die suddenly, among them one who had been appointed a few days earlier to a professorship for which he had long
been waiting.
V.
Another absurd dream which plays with figures:
An acquaintance of mine, Herr M, has been attacked in an essay by no less a person than Goethe and, as we all think, with unjustifiable
vehemence. Herr M is, of course, crushed by this attack. He complains of it bitterly at a dinner-party; but his veneration for Goethe has not
suffered as a result of this personal experience. I try to elucidate the temporal relations a little, as they seem improbable to me. Goethe died in
1832; since his attack upon M must, of course, have taken place earlier, M was at the time quite a young man. It seems plausible to me that he
was 18 years old. But I do not know exactly what the date of the present year is, and so the whole calculation lapses into obscurity. The attack, by
the way, is contained in Goethe's well-known essay on "Nature."
We shall soon find the means of justifying the nonsense of this dream. Herr M, with whom I became acquainted at a dinner-party, had recently
asked me to examine his brother, who showed signs of general paralysis. The conjecture was right; the painful thing about this visit was that the
patient gave his brother away by alluding to his youthful pranks, though our conversation gave him no occasion to do so. I had asked the patient
to tell me the year of his birth, and had repeatedly got him to make trifling calculations in order to show the weakness of his memory - which
tests, by the way, he passed quite well. Now I can see that I behave like a paralytic in the dream (I do not know exactly what the date of the
present year is). Other material of the dream is drawn from another recent source. The editor of a medical periodical, a friend of mine, had
accepted for his paper a very unfavourable crushing review of the last book of my Berlin friend, Fl, the critic being a very youthful reviewer, who
was not very competent to pass judgment. I thought I had a right to interfere, and called the editor to account; he greatly regretted his acceptance
of the review, but he would not promise any redress. I thereupon broke off my relations with the periodical, and in my letter of resignation I
expressed the hope that our personal relations would not suffer as a result of the incident. The third source of this dream is an account given by a
female patient - it was fresh in my memory at the time - of the psychosis of her brother who had fallen into a frenzy crying "Nature, Nature." The
physicians in attendance thought that the cry was derived from a reading of Goethe's beautiful essay, and that it pointed to the patient's overwork
in the study of natural philosophy. I thought, rather, of the sexual meaning in which even our less cultured people use the word Nature, and the
fact that the unfortunate man afterwards mutilated his genitals seems to show that I was not far wrong. Eighteen years was the age of this patient
at the time of this access of frenzy.
If I add, further, that the book of my so severely criticized friend ("One asks oneself whether the author or oneself is crazy" had been the opinion
of another critic) treats of the temporal conditions of life, and refers the duration of Goethe's life to the multiple of a number significant from the
biological point of view, it will readily be admitted that in my dream I am putting myself in my friend's place. (I try to elucidate the temporal
relations a little.) But I behave like a paretic, and the dream revels in absurdity. This means that the dream-thoughts say, ironically: "Naturally, he
is the fool, the lunatic, and you are the clever people who know better. Perhaps, however, it is the other way about?" Now, the other way about is
abundantly represented in my dream, inasmuch as Goethe has attacked the young man, which is absurd, while it is perfectly possible even today
for a young fellow to attack the immortal Goethe; and inasmuch as I reckon from the year of Goethe's death, while I made the paretic reckon from
the year of his birth.
But I have further promised to show that no dream is inspired by other than egoistical motives. Accordingly, I must account for the fact that in
this dream I make my friend's cause my own, and put myself in his place. My critical conviction in waking life would not justify my doing so.
Now, the story of the eighteen-year-old patient, and the divergent interpretations of his cry, "Nature," allude to the fact that I have put myself into
opposition to the majority of physicians by claiming a sexual aetiology for the psychoneuroses. I may say to myself: "You will meet with the
same kind of criticism as your friend; indeed you have already done so to some extent"; so that I may now replace the he in the dream-thoughts
by we. "Yes, you are right; we two are the fools." That mea res agitur is clearly shown by the mention of the short, incomparably beautiful essay
of Goethe's, for it was a popular lecture on this essay which induced me to study the natural sciences when I left the Gymnasium, and was still
undecided as to my future.
VI.
I have to show that yet another dream in which my ego does not appear is none the less egoistic. In chapter V., D., I referred to a short dream in
which Professor M says: "My son, the myopic..."; and I stated that this was only a preliminary dream, preceding another in which I play a part. 
Here is the main dream, previously omitted, which challenges us to explain its absurd and unintelligible word-formation.
On account of something or other that is happening in Rome, it is necessary for the children to flee, and this they do. The scene is then laid before
a gate, a double gate in the ancient style (the Porta Romana in Siena, as I realize while I am dreaming). I am sitting on the edge of a well, and I
am greatly depressed; I am almost weeping. A woman - a nurse, a nun - brings out the two boys and hands them over to their father, who is not
myself. The elder is distinctly my eldest son, but I do not see the face of the other boy. The woman asks the eldest boy for a parting kiss. She is
remarkable for a red nose. The boy refuses her the kiss, but says to her, extending her his hand in parting, "Auf Geseres," and to both of us (or to
one of us) "Auf Ungeseres." I have the idea that this indicates a preference.
This dream is built upon a tangle of thoughts induced by a play I saw at the theatre, called Das neue Ghetto (The New Ghetto). The Jewish
question, anxiety as to the future of my children, who cannot be given a fatherland, anxiety as to educating them so that they may enjoy the
privileges of citizens - all these features may easily be recognized in the accompanying dream-thoughts.
"By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept." Siena, like Rome, is famous for its beautiful fountains. In the dream I have to find some sort
of substitute for Rome (cf. chapter V., B.) from among localities which are known to me. Near the Porta Romana of Siena we saw a large,
brightly-lit building, which we learned was the Manicomio, the insane asylum. Shortly before the dream I had heard that a co-religionist had been
forced to resign a position, which he had secured with great effort, in a State asylum.
Our interest is aroused by the speech: "Auf Geseres," where one might expect, from the situation continued throughout the dream, "Auf
Wiedersehen" (Au revoir), and by its quite meaningless antithesis: "Auf Ungeseres." (Un is a prefix meaning "not.")
According to information received from Hebrew scholars, Geseres is a genuine Hebrew word, derived from the verb goiser, and may best be
rendered by "ordained sufferings, fated disaster." From its employment in the Jewish jargon one would take it to mean "wailing and lamentation."
Ungeseres is a coinage of my own, and is the first to attract my attention, but for the present it baffles me. The little observation at the end of the
dream - that Ungeseres indicates an advantage over Geseres - opens the way to the associations, and therewith to understanding. This relation
holds good in the case of caviar; the unsalted kind is more highly prized than the salted. "Caviar to the general" - "noble passions." Herein lies
concealed a jesting allusion to a member of my household, of whom I hope - for she is younger than I - that she will watch over the future of my
children; this, too, agrees with the fact that another member of my household, our worthy nurse, is clearly indicated by the nurse (or nun) of the
dream. But a connecting-link is wanting between the pair, salted - unsalted and Geseres - Ungeseres. This is to be found in gesauert and
ungesauert (leavened and unleavened). In their flight or exodus from Egypt the children of Israel had not time to allow their dough to become
leavened, and in commemoration of this event they eat unleavened bread at Passover to this day. Here, too, I can find room for the sudden
association which occurred to me in this part of the analysis. I remembered how we, my friend from Berlin and myself, had strolled about the
streets of Breslau, a city which was strange to us, during the last days of Easter. A little girl asked me the way to a certain street; I had to tell her
that I did not know it; I then remarked to my friend, "I hope that later on in life the child will show more perspicacity in selecting the persons
whom she allows to direct her." Shortly afterwards a sign caught my eye: "Dr. Herod, consulting hours..." I said to myself: "I hope this colleague
does not happen to be a children's specialist." Meanwhile, my friend had been developing his views on the biological significance of bilateral
symmetry, and had begun a sentence with the words: "If we had only one eye in the middle of the forehead, like Cyclops..." This leads us to the
speech of the professor in the preliminary dream: "My son, the myopic." And now I have been led to the chief source for Geseres. Many years
ago, when this son of Professor M's, who is today an independent thinker, was still sitting on his school-bench, he contracted an affection of the
eye which, according to the doctor, gave some cause for anxiety. He expressed the opinion that so long as it was confined to one eye it was of no
great significance, but that if it should extend to the other eye it would be serious. The affection subsided in the one eye without leaving any ill
effects; shortly afterwards, however, the same symptoms did actually appear in the other eye. The boy's terrified mother immediately summoned
the physician to her distant home in the country. But the doctor was now of a different opinion (took the other side). "What sort of 'Geseres' is this
you are making?" he asked the mother, impatiently. "If one side got well, the other will, too." And so it turned out.
And now as to the connection between this and myself and my family. The school-bench upon which Professor M's son learned his first lessons
has become the property of my eldest son; it was given to him by the boy's mother, and it is into his mouth that I put the words of farewell in the
dream. One of the wishes that may be connected with this transference may now be readily guessed. This school-bench is intended by its
construction to guard the child from becoming shortsighted and one-sided. Hence myopia (and behind it the Cyclops), and the discussion about
bilateralism. The fear of one-sidedness has a twofold significance; it might mean not only physical one-sidedness, but intellectual one-sidedness
also. Does it not seem as though the scene in the dream, with all its craziness, were contradicting precisely this anxiety? When on the one hand
the boy has spoken his words of farewell, on the other hand he calls out the very opposite, as though to establish an equilibrium. He is acting, as it
were, in obedience to bilateral symmetry!
Thus, a dream frequently has the profoundest meaning in the places where it seems most absurd. In all ages those who have had something to say
and have been unable to say it without danger to themselves have gladly donned the cap and bells. He for whom the forbidden saying was
intended was more likely to tolerate it if he was able to laugh at it, and to flatter himself with the comment that what he disliked was obviously
absurd. Dreams behave in real life as does the prince in the play who is obliged to pretend to be a madman, and hence we may say of dreams what
Hamlet said of himself, substituting an unintelligible jest for the actual truth: "I am but mad north-northwest; when the wind is southerly I know a
hawk from a handsaw" (Act II. sc. ii).[85]
Thus, my solution of the problem of absurdity in dreams is that the dream-thoughts are never absurd - at least, not those of the dreams of sane
persons - and that the dream-work produces absurd dreams, and dreams with individually absurd elements, when the dream-thoughts contain
criticism, ridicule, and derision, which have to be given expression. My next concern is to show that the dream-work is exhausted by the cooperation of the three factors enumerated - and of a fourth which has still to be mentioned - that it does no more than translate the dreamthoughts, observing the four conditions prescribed, and that the question whether the mind goes to work in dreams with all its intellectual
faculties, or with only part of them, is wrongly stated, and does not meet the actual state of affairs. But since there are plenty of dreams in which
judgments are passed, criticisms made, and facts recognized in which astonishment at some individual element of the dream appears, and
explanations are attempted, and arguments adduced, I must meet the objections deriving from these occurrences by the citation of selected
examples.
My answer is as follows: Everything in dreams which occurs as the apparent functioning of the critical faculty is to be regarded, not as the
intellectual performance of the dream-work, but as belonging to the substance of the dream-thoughts, and it has found its way from these, as a
completed structure, into the manifest dream-content. I may go even farther than this! I may even say that the judgments which are passed upon
the dream as it is remembered after waking, and the feelings which are aroused by the reproduction of the dream, belong largely to the latent
dream-content, and must be fitted into place in the interpretation of the dream.
1. One striking example of this has already been given. A female patient does not wish to relate her dream because it was too vague. She saw a
person in the dream, and does not know whether it was her husband or her father. Then follows a second dream-fragment, in which there occurs a
manure-pail, with which the following reminiscence is associated. As a young housewife she once declared jestingly, in the presence of a young
male relative who frequented the house, that her next business would be to procure a new manure-pail. Next morning one was sent to her, but it
was filled with lilies of the valley. This part of the dream served to represent the phrase, "Not grown on my own manure."[86] If we complete the
analysis, we find in the dream-thoughts the after-effect of a story heard in youth; namely, that a girl had given birth to a child, and that it was not
clear who was the father. The dream-representation here overlaps into the waking thought, and allows one of the elements of the dream-thoughts
to be represented by a judgment, formed in the waking state, of the whole dream.
2. A similar case: One of my patients has a dream which strikes him as being an interesting one, for he says to himself, immediately after waking:
"I must tell that to the doctor." The dream is analysed, and shows the most distinct allusion to an affair in which he had become involved during
the treatment, and of which he had decided to tell me nothing.[87]
3. Here is a third example from my own experience:
I go to the hospital with P, through a neighbourhood in which there are houses and gardens. Thereupon I have an idea that I have already seen thislocality several times in my dreams. I do not know my way very well; P shows me a way which leads round a corner to a restaurant (indoor); here
I ask for Frau Doni, and I hear that she is living at the back of the house, in a small room, with three children. I go there, and on the way I meet an
undefined person with my two little girls. After I have been with them for a while, I take them with me. A sort of reproach against my wife for
having left them there.
On waking I am conscious of a great satisfaction, whose motive seems to be the fact that I shall now learn from the analysis what is meant by I
have already dreamed of this.[88] But the analysis of the dream tells me nothing about this; it shows me only that the satisfaction belongs to the
latent dream-content, and not to a judgment of the dream. It is satisfaction concerning the fact that I have had children by my marriage. P's path
through life and my own ran parallel for a time; now he has outstripped me both socially and financially, but his marriage has remained childless.
Of this the two occasions of the dream give proof on complete analysis. On the previous day I had read in the newspaper the obituary notice of a
certain Frau Dona A - y (which I turn into Doni), who had died in childbirth; I was told by my wife that the dead woman had been nursed by the
same midwife whom she herself had employed at the birth of our two youngest boys. The name Dona had caught my attention, for I had recently
met with it for the first time in an English novel. The other occasion for the dream may be found in the date on which it was dreamed; this was the
night before the birthday of my eldest boy, who, it seems, is poetically gifted.
4. The same satisfaction remained with me after waking from the absurd dream that my father, after his death, had played a political role among
the Magyars. It is motivated by the persistence of the feeling which accompanied the last sentence of the dream: I remember that on his deathbed
he looked so like Garibaldi, and I am glad that it has really come true... (Followed by a forgotten continuation.) I can now supply from the
analysis what should fill this gap. It is the mention of my second boy, to whom I have given the baptismal name of an eminent historical
personage who attracted me greatly during my boyhood, especially during my stay in England. I had to wait for a year before I could fulfil my
intention of using this name if the next child should be a son, and with great satisfaction I greeted him by this name as soon as he was born. It is
easy to see how the father's suppressed desire for greatness is, in his thoughts, transferred to his children; one is inclined to believe that this is one
of the ways by which the suppression of this desire (which becomes necessary in the course of life) is effected. The little fellow won his right to
inclusion in the text of this dream by virtue of the fact that the same accident - that of soiling his clothes (quite pardonable in either a child or in a
dying person) - had occurred to him. Compare with this the allusion Stuhlrichter (presiding judge) and the wish of the dream: to stand before
one's children great and undefiled. 
5. If I should now have to look for examples of judgments or expressions of opinion which remain in the dream itself, and are not continued in, or
transferred to, our waking thoughts, my task would be greatly facilitated were I to take my examples from dreams which have already been cited
for other purposes. The dream of Goethe's attack on Herr M appears to contain quite a number of acts of judgment. I try to elucidate the temporal
relations a little, as they seem improbable to me. Does not this look like a critical impulse directed against the nonsensical idea that Goethe should
have made a literary attack upon a young man of my acquaintance? It seems plausible to me that he was 18 years old. That sounds quite like the
result of a calculation, though a silly one; and the I do not know exactly what is the date of the present year would be an example of uncertainty or
doubt in dreams.
But I know from analysis that these acts of judgment, which seem to have been performed in the dream for the first time, admit of a different
construction, in the light of which they become indispensable for interpreting the dream, while at the same time all absurdity is avoided. With the
sentence I try to elucidate the temporal relations a little, I put myself in the place of my friend, who is actually trying to elucidate the temporal
relations of life. The sentence then loses its significance as a judgment which objects to the nonsense of the previous sentences. The interposition,
Which seems improbable to me, belongs to the following: It seems plausible to me. With almost these identical words I replied to the lady who
told me of her brother's illness: "It seems improbable to me" that the cry of "Nature, Nature," was in any way connected with Goethe; it seems
much more plausible to me that it has the sexual significance which is known to you. In this case, it is true, a judgment was expressed, but in
reality, not in a dream, and on an occasion which is remembered and utilized by the dream-thoughts. The dream-content appropriates this
judgment like any other fragment of the dream-thoughts.
The number 18 with which the judgment in the dream is meaninglessly connected still retains a trace of the context from which the real judgment
was taken. Lastly, the I do not know exactly what is the date of the present year is intended for no other purpose than that of my identification
with the paralytic, in examining whom this particular fact was established.
In the solution of these apparent acts of judgment in dreams, it will be well to keep in mind the above-mentioned rule of interpretation, which tells
us that we must disregard the coherence which is established in the dream between its constituent parts as an unessential phenomenon, and that
every dream-element must be taken separately and traced back to its source. The dream is a compound, which for the purposes of investigation
must be broken up into its elements. On the other hand, we become alive to the fact that there is a psychic force which expresses itself in our
dreams and establishes this apparent coherence; that is, the material obtained by the dream-work undergoes a secondary elaboration. Here we
have the manifestations of that psychic force which we shall presently take into consideration as the fourth of the factors which co-operate in
dream-formation.
6. Let us now look for other examples of acts of judgment in the dreams which have already been cited. In the absurd dream about the
communication from the town council, I ask the question, "You married soon after?" I reckon that I was born in 1856, which seems to me to be
directly afterwards. This certainly takes the form of an inference. My father married shortly after his attack, in the year 1851. I am the eldest son,
born in 1856; so this is correct. We know that this inference has in fact been falsified by the wish-fulfilment, and that the sentence which
dominates the dream-thoughts is as follows: Four or five years - that is no time at all - that need not be counted. But every part of this chain of
reasoning may be seen to be otherwise determined from the dream-thoughts, as regards both its content and its form. It is the patient of whose
patience my colleague complains who intends to marry immediately the treatment is ended. The manner in which I converse with my father in
this dream reminds me of an examination or cross-examination, and thus of a university professor who was in the habit of compiling a complete
docket of personal data when entering his pupils' names: You were born when? - 1856. - Patre? - Then the applicant gave the Latin form of the
baptismal name of the father and we students assumed that the Hofrat drew inferences from the father's name which the baptismal name of the
candidate would not always have justified. Hence, the drawing of inferences in the dream would be merely the repetition of the drawing of
inferences which appears as a scrap of material in the dream-thoughts. From this we learn something new. If an inference occurs in the dreamcontent, it assuredly comes from the dream-thoughts; but it may be contained in these as a fragment of remembered material, or it may serve as
the logical connective of a series of dream-thoughts. In any case, an inference in the dream represents an inference taken from the dreamthoughts.[89]
It will be well to continue the analysis of this dream at this point. With the inquisition of the professor is associated the recollection of an index
(in my time published in Latin) of the university students; and further, the recollection of my own course of study. The five years allowed for the
study of medicine were, as usual, too little for me. I worked unconcernedly for some years longer; my acquaintances regarded me as a loafer, and
doubted whether I should get through. Then, suddenly, I decided to take my examinations, and I got through in spite of the postponement. A fresh
confirmation of the dream-thoughts with which I defiantly meet my critics: "Even though you won't believe it, because I am taking my time, I
shall reach the conclusion (German, Schluss = end, conclusion, inference). It has often happened like that."
In its introductory portion, this dream contains several sentences which, we can hardly deny, are of the nature of an argument. And this argument
is not at all absurd; it might just as well occur in my waking thoughts. In my dream I make fun of the communication from the town council, for
in the first place I was not yet born in 1851, and in the second place my father, to whom it might refer, is already dead. Not only is each of these
statements perfectly correct in itself, but they are the very arguments that I should employ if I received such a communication. We know from the
foregoing analysis that this dream has sprung from the soil of deeply embittered and scornful dream-thoughts; and if we may also assume that the
motive of the censorship is a very powerful one, we shall understand that the dream-thought has every occasion to create a flawless refutation of 
an unreasonable demand, in accordance with the pattern contained in the dream-thoughts. But the analysis shows that in this case the dream-work
has not been required to make a free imitation, but that material taken from the dream-thoughts had to be employed for the purpose. It is as
though in an algebraic equation there should occur, besides the figures, plus and minus signs, and symbols of powers and of roots, and as though
someone, in copying this equation, without understanding it, should copy both the symbols and the figures, and mix them all up together. The two
arguments may be traced to the following material: It is painful to me to think that many of the hypotheses upon which I base my psychological
solution of the psychoneuroses which will arouse scepticism and ridicule when they first become known. For instance, I shall have to assert that
impressions of the second year of life, and even the first, leave an enduring trace upon the emotional life of subsequent neuropaths, and that these
impressions - although greatly distorted and exaggerated by the memory - may furnish the earliest and profoundest basis of a hysterical symptom.
Patients to whom I explain this at a suitable moment are wont to parody my explanation by offering to search for reminiscences of the period
when they were not yet born. My disclosure of the unsuspected part played by the father in the earliest sexual impulses of female patients may
well have a similar reception. (Cf. the discussion in chapter V., D). Nevertheless, it is my well-founded conviction that both doctrines are true. In
confirmation of this I recall certain examples in which the death of the father occurred when the child was very young, and subsequent incidents,
otherwise inexplicable, proved that the child had unconsciously reserved recollections of the person who had so early gone out of its life. I know
that both my assertions are based upon inferences whose validity will be attacked. It is the doing of the wish-fulfilment that precisely the material
of those inferences, which I fear will be contested, should be utilized by the dream-work for establishing incontestable conclusions.
7. In one dream, which I have hitherto only touched upon, astonishment at the subject emerging is distinctly expressed at the outset.
The elder Brucke must have set me some task or other; strangely enough, it relates to the preparation of the lower part of my own body, the pelvis
and legs, which I see before me as though in the dissecting-room, but without feeling the absence of part of my body, and without a trace of
horror. Louise N is standing beside me, and helps me in the work. The pelvis is eviscerated; now the upper, now the lower aspect is visible, and
the two aspects are commingled. Large fleshy red tubercles are visible (which, even in the dream, make me think of haemorrhoids). Also
something lying over them had to be carefully picked off; it looked like crumpled tinfoil. [90] Then I was once more in possession of my legs, and
I made a journey through the city, but I took a cab (as I was tired). To my astonishment, the cab drove into the front door of a house, which
opened and allowed it to pass into a corridor, which was broken off at the end, and eventually led on into the open.[91] Finally I wandered
through changing landscapes, with an Alpine guide, who carried my things. He carried me for some distance, out of consideration for my tired
legs. The ground was swampy; we went along the edge; people were sitting on the ground, like Red Indians or gypsies; among them a girl. Until
then I had made my way along on the slippery ground, in constant astonishment that I was so well able to do so after making the preparation. At
last we came to a small wooden house with an open window at one end. Here the guide set me down, and laid two planks, which stood in
readiness, on the window-sill so as to bridge the chasm which had to be crossed from the window. Now I grew really alarmed about my legs.
Instead of the expected crossing, I saw two grown-up men lying upon wooden benches which were fixed on the walls of the hut, and something
like two sleeping children next to them; as though not the planks but the children were intended to make the crossing possible. I awoke with
terrified thoughts.
Anyone who his been duly impressed by the extensive nature of dream-condensation will readily imagine what a number of pages the exhaustive
analysis of this dream would fill. Fortunately for the context, I shall make this dream only the one example of astonishment in dreams, which
makes its appearance in the parenthetical remark, strangely enough. Let us consider the occasion of the dream. It is a visit of this lady, Louise N,
who helps me with my work in the dream. She says: "Lend me something to read." I offer her She, by Rider Haggard. A strange book, but full of
hidden meaning," I try to explain; "the eternal feminine, the immortality of our emotions -" Here she interrupts me: "I know that book already.
Haven't you something of your own?" "No, my own immortal works are still unwritten." "Well, when are you going to publish your so-called
'latest revelations,' which, you promised us, even we should be able to read?" she asks, rather sarcastically. I now perceive that she is a
mouthpiece for someone else, and I am silent. I think of the effort it cost me to make public even my work on dreams, in which I had to surrender
so much of my own intimate nature. ("The best that you know you can't tell the boys.") The preparation of my own body which I am ordered to
make in my dream is thus the self-analysis involved in the communication of my dreams. The elder Brucke very properly finds a place here; in
the first years of my scientific work it so happened that I neglected the publication of a certain discovery until his insistence forced me to publish
it. But the further trains of thought, proceeding from my conversation with Louise N, go too deep to become conscious; they are side-tracked by
way of the material which has been incidentally awakened in me by the mention of Rider Haggard's She. The comment strangely enough applies
to this book, and to another by the same author, The Heart of the World; and numerous elements of the dream are taken from these two fantastic
romances. The swampy ground over which the dreamer is carried, the chasm which has to be crossed by means of planks, come from She; the
Red Indians, the girl, and the wooden house, from The Heart of the World. In both novels a woman is the leader, and both treat of perilous
wanderings; She has to do with an adventurous journey to an undiscovered country, a place almost untrodden by the foot of man. According to a
note which I find in my record of the dream, the fatigue in my legs was a real sensation from those days. Probably a weary mood corresponded
with this fatigue, and the doubting question: "How much farther will my legs carry me?" In She, the end of the adventure is that the heroine meets
her death in the mysterious central fire, instead of winning immortality for herself and for others. Some related anxiety has mistakably arisen in
the dream-thoughts. The wooden house is assuredly also a coffin - that is, the grave. But in representing this most unwished-for of all thoughts by
means of a wish-fulfilment, the dream-work has achieved its masterpiece. I was once in a grave, but it was an empty Etruscan grave near Orvieto -
a narrow chamber with two stone benches on the walls, upon which were lying the skeletons of two adults. The interior of the wooden house in
the dream looks exactly like this grave, except that stone has been replaced by wood. The dream seems to say: "If you must already sojourn in
your grave, let it be this Etruscan grave," and by means of this interpolation it transforms the most mournful expectation into one that is really to
be desired. Unfortunately, as we shall learn, the dream is able to change into its opposite only the idea accompanying an affect, but not always the 
affect itself. Hence, I awake with thoughts of terror, even after the idea that perhaps my children will achieve what has been denied to their father
has forced its way to representation: a fresh allusion to the strange romance in which the identity of a character is preserved through a series of
generations covering two thousand years.
8. in the context of another dream there is a similar expression of astonishment at what is experienced in the dream. This, however, is connected
with such a striking, far-fetched, and almost intellectual attempt at explanation that if only on this account I should have to subject the whole
dream to analysis, even if it did not possess two other interesting features. On the night of the eighteenth of July I was travelling on the Southern
Railway, and in my sleep I heard someone call out: "Hollthurn, 10 minutes." I immediately think of Holothuria - of a natural history museum -
that here is a place where valiant men have vainly resisted the domination of their overlord. - Yes, the counter-reformation in Austria! - As though
it were a place in Styria or the Tyrol. Now I see indistinctly a small museum, in which the relics of the acquisitions of these men are preserved. I
should like to leave the train, but I hesitate to do so. There are women with fruit on the platform; they squat on the ground, and in that position
invitingly hold up their baskets. - I hesitated, in doubt as to whether we have time, but here we are still stationary. - I am suddenly in another
compartment in which the leather and the seats are so narrow that one's spine directly touches the back.[92] I am surprised at this, but I may have
changed carriages while asleep. Several people, among them an English brother and sister; a row of books plainly on a shelf on the wall. - I see
The Wealth of Nations, and Matter and Motion (by Maxwell), thick books bound in brown linen. The man asks his sister about a book of
Schiller's, whether she has forgotten it. These books seem to belong now to me, now to them. At this point I wish to join in the conversation in
order to confirm or support what is being said. I wake sweating all over, because all the windows are shut, The train stops at Marburg.
While writing down the dream, a part of it occurs to me which my memory wished to pass over. I tell the brother and sister (in English), referring
to a certain book: "It is from..." but I correct myself: "It is by..." The man remarks to his sister: "He said it correctly."
The dream begins with the name of a station, which seems to have almost waked me. For this name, which was Marburg, I substitute Hollthurn.
The fact that I heard Marburg the first, or perhaps the second time it was called out, is proved by the mention of Schiller in the dream; he was
born in Marburg, though not the Styrian Marburg.[93] Now on this occasion, although I was travelling first class, I was doing so under very
disagreeable circumstances. The train was overcrowded; in my compartment I had come upon a lady and gentleman who seemed very fine
people, and had not the good breeding, or did not think it worth while, to conceal their displeasure at my intrusion. My polite greeting was not
returned, and although they were sitting side by side (with their backs to the engine), the woman before my eyes hastened to pre-empt the seat
opposite her, and next to the window, with her umbrella; the door was immediately closed, and pointed remarks about the opening of windows
were exchanged. Probably I was quickly recognized as a person hungry for fresh air. It was a hot night, and the atmosphere of the compartment,
closed on both sides, was almost suffocating. My experience as a traveller leads me to believe that such inconsiderate and overbearing conduct
marks people who have paid for their tickets only partly, or not at all. When the conductor came round, and I presented my dearly bought ticket,
the lady exclaimed haughtily and almost threateningly: "My husband has a pass." She was an imposing-looking person, with a discontented
expression, in age not far removed from the autumn of feminine beauty; the man had no chance to say anything; he sat there motionless. I tried to
sleep. In my dream I take a terrible revenge on my disagreeable travelling companions; no one would suspect what insults and humiliations are
concealed behind the disjointed fragments of the first half of the dream. After this need has been satisfied, the second wish, to exchange my
compartment for another, makes itself felt. The dream changes its scene so often, and without making the slightest objection to such changes, that
it would not have seemed at all remarkable had I at once, from my memories, replaced my travelling companions by more agreeable persons. But
here was a case where something or other opposes the change of scene, and finds it necessary to explain it. How did I suddenly get into another
compartment? I could not positively remember having changed carriages. So there was only one explanation. I must have left the carriage while
asleep - an unusual occurrence, examples of which, however, are known to neuropathologists. We know of persons who undertake railway
journeys in a crepuscular state, without betraying their abnormal condition by any sign whatever, until at some stage of their journey they come to
themselves, and are surprised by the gap in their memory. Thus, while I am still dreaming, I declare my own case to be such a case of
automatisme ambulatoire.
Analysis permits of another solution. The attempt at explanation, which so surprises me if I am to attribute it to the dream-work, is not original,
but is copied from the neurosis of one of my patients. I have already spoken in another chapter of a highly cultured and kindly man who began,
shortly after the death of his parents, to accuse himself of murderous tendencies, and who was distressed by the precautionary measures which he
had to take to secure himself against these tendencies. His was a case of severe obsessional ideas with full insight. To begin with, it was painful to
him to walk through the streets, as he was obsessed by the necessity of accounting for all the persons he met; he had to know whither they had
disappeared; if one of them suddenly eluded his pursuing glance, he was left with a feeling of distress and the idea that he might possibly have
made away with the man. Behind this obsessive idea was concealed, among other things, a Cain-phantasy, for "all men are brothers." Owing to
the impossibility of accomplishing this task, he gave up going for walks, and spent his life imprisoned within his four walls. But reports of
murders which had been committed in the world outside were constantly reaching his room by way of the newspapers, and his conscience
tormented him with the doubt that he might be the murderer for whom the police were looking. The certainty that he had not left the house for
weeks protected him for a time against these accusations, until one day there dawned upon him the possibility that he might have left his house
while in an unconscious state, and might thus have committed murder without knowing anything about it. From that time onwards he locked his
front door, and gave the key to his old housekeeper, strictly forbidding her to give it into his hands, even if he demanded it.
This, then, is the origin of the attempted explanation that I may have changed carriages while in an unconscious state; it has been taken into the
dream ready-made, from the material of the dream-thoughts, and is evidently intended to identify me with the person of my patient. My memory 
of this patient was awakened by natural association. My last night journey had been made a few weeks earlier in his company. He was cured, and
we were going into the country together to his relatives, who had sent for me; as we had a compartment to ourselves, we left all the windows open
throughout the night, and for as long as I remained awake we had a most interesting conversation. I knew that hostile impulses towards his father
in childhood, in a sexual connection, had been at the root of his illness. By identifying myself with him, I wanted to make an analogous
confession to myself. The second scene of the dream really resolves itself into a wanton phantasy to the effect that my two elderly travelling
companions had acted so uncivilly towards me because my arrival on the scene had prevented them from exchanging kisses and embraces during
the night, as they had intended. This phantasy, however, goes back to an early incident of my childhood when, probably impelled by sexual
curiosity, I had intruded into my parents' bedroom, and was driven thence by my father's emphatic command.
I think it would be superfluous to multiply such examples. They would all confirm what we have learned from those already cited: namely, that
an act of judgment in a dream is merely the repetition of an original act of judgment in the dream-thoughts. In most cases it is an unsuitable
repetition, fitted into an inappropriate context; occasionally, however, as in our last example, it is so artfully applied that it may almost give one
the impression of independent intellectual activity in the dream. At this point we might turn our attention to that psychic activity which, though it
does not appear to co-operate constantly in the formation of dreams, yet endeavours to fuse the dream-elements of different origin into a flawless
and significant whole. We consider it necessary, however, first of all to consider the expressions of affect which appear in dreams, and to compare
these with the affects which analysis discovers in the dream-thoughts. 
A shrewd remark of Stricker's called our attention to the fact that the expressions of affects in dreams cannot be disposed of in the contemptuous
fashion in which we are wont to shake off the dream-content after we have waked. "If I am afraid of robbers in my dreams, the robbers, to be
sure, are imaginary, but the fear of them is real"; and the same thing is true if I rejoice in my dream. According to the testimony of our feelings,
an affect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of like intensity experienced in waking life, and the dream presses its claim to be
accepted as part of our real psychic experiences, by virtue of its affective rather than its ideational content. In the waking state, we do not put the
one before the other, since we do not know how to evaluate an affect psychically except in connection with an ideational content. If an affect and
an idea are ill-matched as regards their nature or their intensity, our waking judgment becomes confused.
The fact that in dreams the ideational content does not always produce the affective result which in our waking thoughts we should expect as its
necessary consequence has always been a cause of astonishment. Strumpell declared that ideas in dreams are stripped of their psychic values. But
there is no lack of instances in which the reverse is true; when an intensive manifestation of affect appears in a content which seems to offer no
occasion for it. In my dream I may be in a horrible, dangerous, or disgusting situation, and yet I may feel no fear or aversion; on the other hand, I
am sometimes terrified by harmless things, and sometimes delighted by childish things.
This enigma disappeared more suddenly and more completely than perhaps any other dream-problem if we pass from the manifest to the latent
content. We shall then no longer have to explain it, for it will no longer exist. Analysis tells us that the ideational contents have undergone
displacements and substitutions, while the affects have remained unchanged. No wonder, then, that the ideational content which has been altered
by dream-distortion no longer fits the affect which has remained intact; and no cause for wonder when analysis has put the correct content into its
original place.[94]
In a psychic complex which has been subjected to the influence of the resisting censorship, the affects are the unyielding constituent, which alone
can guide us to the correct completion. This state of affairs is revealed in the psychoneuroses even more distinctly than in dreams. Here the affect
is always in the right, at least as regards its quality; its intensity may, of course, be increased by displacement of the neurotic attention. When the
hysterical patient wonders that he should be so afraid of a trifle, or when the sufferer from obsessions is astonished that he should reproach
himself so bitterly for a mere nothing, they are both in error, inasmuch as they regard long conceptual content - the trifle, the mere nothing - as the
essential thing, and they defend themselves in vain, because they make this conceptual content the starting-point of their thought-work. Psychoanalysis, however, puts them on the right path, inasmuch as it recognizes that, on the contrary, it is the affect that is justified, and looks for the
concept which pertains to it, and which has been repressed by a substitution. All that we need assume is that the liberation of affect and the
conceptual content do not constitute the indissoluble organic unity as which we are wont to regard them, but that the two parts may be welded
together, so that analysis will separate them. Dream-interpretation shows that this is actually the case.
I will first of all give an example in which analysis explains the apparent absence of affect in a conceptual content which ought to compel a
liberation of affect.
I.
The dreamer sees three lions in a desert, one of which is laughing, but she is not afraid of them. Then, however, she must have fled from them, for
she is trying to climb a tree. But she finds that her cousin, the French teacher, is already up in the tree, etc.
The analysis yields the following material: The indifferent occasion of the dream was a sentence in the dreamer's English exercise: "The lion's 
greatest adornment is his mane." Her father used to wear a beard which encircled his face like a Mane. The name of her English teacher is Miss
Lyons. An acquaintance of hers sent her the ballads of Loewe (Loewe = lion). These, then, are the three lions; why should she be afraid of them?
She has read a story in which a negro who has incited his fellows to revolt is hunted with bloodhounds, and climbs a tree to save himself. Then
follow fragmentary recollections in the merriest mood, such as the following directions for catching lions (from Die Fliegende Blatter): "Take a
desert and put it through a sieve; the lions will be left behind." Also a very amusing, but not very proper anecdote about an official who is asked
why he does not take greater pains to win the favour of his chief, and who replies that he has been trying to creep into favour, but that his
immediate superior was already up there. The whole matter becomes intelligible as soon as one learns that on the dream-day the lady had received
a visit from her husband's superior. He was very polite to her, and kissed her hand, and she was not at all afraid of him, although he is a big bug
(Grosses Tier = big animal) and plays the part of a social lion in the capital of her country. This lion is, therefore, like the lion in A Midsummer
Night's Dream, who is unmasked as Snug the joiner; and of such stuff are all the dream-lions of which one is not afraid. 
As my second example, I will cite the dream of the girl who saw her sister's little son lying as a corpse in his coffin, but who, it may be added,
was conscious of no pain or sorrow. Why she was unmoved we know from the analysis. The dream only disguised her wish to see once more the
man she loved; the affect had to be attuned to the wish, and not to its disguisement. There was thus no occasion for sorrow.
In a number of dreams the affect does at least remain connected with the conceptual content which has replaced the content really belonging to it.
In others, the dissolution of the complex is carried farther. The affect is entirely separated from the idea belonging to it, and finds itself
accommodated elsewhere in the dream, where it fits into the new arrangement of the dream-elements. We have seen that the same thing happens
to acts of judgment in dreams. If an important inference occurs in the dream-thoughts, there is one in the dream also; but the inference in the
dream may be displaced to entirely different material. Not infrequently this displacement is effected in accordance with the principle of antithesis.
I will illustrate the latter possibility by the following dream, which I have subjected to the most exhaustive analysis. 
A castle by the sea; afterwards it lies not directly on the coast, but on a narrow canal leading to the sea. A certain Herr P is the governor of the
castle. I stand with him in a large salon with three windows, in front of which rise the projections of a wall, like battlements of a fortress. I belong
to the garrison, perhaps as a volunteer naval officer. We fear the arrival of enemy warships, for we are in a state of war. Herr P intends to leave
the castle; he gives me instructions as to what must be done if what we fear should come to pass. His sick wife and his children are in the
threatened castle. As soon as the bombardment begins, the large hall is to be cleared. He breathes heavily, and tries to get away; I detain him, and
ask him how I am to send him news in case of need. He says something further, and immediately afterwards he sinks to the floor dead. I have
probably taxed him unnecessarily with my questions. After his death, which makes no further impression upon me, I consider whether the widow
is to remain in the castle, whether I should give notice of the death to the higher command, whether I should take over the control of the castle as
the next in command. I now stand at the window, and scrutinize the ships as they pass by; they are cargo steamers, and they rush by over the dark
water; several with more than one funnel, others with bulging decks (these are very like the railway stations in the preliminary dream, which has
not been related). Then my brother is standing beside me, and we both look out of the window on to the canal. At the sight of one ship we are
alarmed, and call out: "Here comes the warship!" It turns out, however, that they are only the ships which I have already seen, returning. Now
comes a small ship, comically truncated, so that it ends amidships; on the deck one sees curious things like cups or little boxes. We call out as
with one voice: "That is the breakfast ship."
The rapid motion of the ships, the deep blue of the water, the brown smoke of the funnels - all these together produce an intense and gloomy
impression.
The localities in this dream are compiled from several journeys to the Adriatic (Miramare, Duino, Venice, Aquileia). A short but enjoyable Easter
trip to Aquileia with my brother, a few weeks before the dream, was still fresh in my memory; also the naval war between America and Spain,
and, associated with this my anxiety as to the fate of my relatives in America, play a part in the dream. Manifestations of affect appear at two
places in the dream. In one place an affect that would be expected is lacking: it expressly emphasized that the death of the governor makes no
impression upon me; at another point, when I see the warships, I am frightened, and experience all the sensations of fright in my sleep. The
distribution of affects in this well-constructed dream has been effected in such a way that any obvious contradiction is avoided. For there is no
reason why I should be frightened at the governor's death, and it is fitting that, as the commander of the castle, I should be alarmed by the sight of
the warship. Now analysis shows that Herr P is nothing but a substitute for my own ego (in the dream I am his substitute). I am the governor who
suddenly dies. The dream-thoughts deal with the future of my family after my premature death. No other disagreeable thought is to be found
among the dream-thoughts. The alarm which goes with the sight of the warship must be transferred from it to this disagreeable thought. Inversely,
the analysis shows that the region of the dream-thoughts from which the warship comes is laden with most cheerful reminiscences. In Venice, a
year before the dream, one magically beautiful day, we stood at the windows of our room on the Riva Schiavoni and looked out over the blue
lagoon, on which there was more traffic to be seen than usual. Some English ships were expected; they were to be given a festive reception; and
suddenly my wife cried, happy as a child: "Here comes the English warship!" In the dream I am frightened by the very same words; once more
we see that speeches in dreams have their origin in speeches in real life. I shall presently show that even the element English in this speech has 
not been lost for the dream-work. Here, then, between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content, I turn joy into fright, and I need only point to
the fact that by means of this transformation I give expression to part of the latent dream-content. The example shows, however, that the dreamwork is at liberty to detach the occasion of an affect from its connections in the dream-thoughts, and to insert it at any other place it chooses in the
dream-content.
I will take the opportunity which is here, incidentally offered of subjecting to a closer analysis the breakfast ship, whose appearance in the dream
so absurdly concludes a situation that has been rationally adhered to. If I look more closely at this dream-object, I am impressed after the event by
the fact that it was black. and that by reason of its truncation at its widest beam it achieved, at the truncated end, a considerable resemblance to an
object which had aroused our interest in the museums of the Etruscan cities. This object was a rectangular cup of black clay, with two handles,
upon which stood things like coffee-cups or tea-cups, very similar to our modern service for the breakfast table. Upon inquiry we learned that this
was the toilet set of an Etruscan lady, with little boxes for rouge and powder; and we told one another jestingly that it would not be a bad idea to
take a thing like that home to the lady of the house. The dream-object, therefore, signifies a black toilet (toilette = dress), or mourning. and refers
directly to a death. The other end of the dream-object reminds us of the boat (German, Nachen, from the Greek root, nechus, as a philological
friend informs me), upon which corpses were laid in prehistoric times, and were left to be buried by the sea. This is associated with the return of
the ships in the dream.
"Silently on his rescued boat the old man drifts into harbour."
It is the return voyage after the shipwreck (German: Schiff-bruch = ship-breaking); the breakfast ship looks as though it were broken off
amidships. But whence comes the name breakfast ship? This is where English comes in, which we have left over from the warships. Breakfast, a
breaking of the fast. Breaking again belongs to shipwreck (Schiff-bruch), and fasting is associated with the black (mourning).
But the only thing about this breakfast ship which has been newly created by the dream is its name. The thing existed in reality, and recalls to me
one of the merriest moments of my last journey. As we distrusted the fare in Aquileia, we took some food with us from Goerz, and bought a bottle
of the excellent Istrian wine in Aquileia; and while the little mail-steamer slowly travelled through the canale delle Mee and into the lonely
expanse of lagoon in the direction of Grado, we had breakfast on deck in the highest spirits - we were the only passengers - and it tasted to us as
few breakfasts have ever tasted. This, then, was the breakfast ship, and it is behind this very recollection of the gayest joie de vivre that the dream
hides the saddest thoughts of an unknown and mysterious future.
The detachment of affects from the groups of ideas which have occasioned their liberation is the most striking thing that happens to them in
dream-formation, but it is neither the only nor even the most essential change which they undergo on the way from the dream-thoughts to the
manifest dream. If the affects in the dream-thoughts are compared with those in the dream, one thing at once becomes clear: Wherever there is an
affect in the dream, it is to be found also in the dream-thoughts; the converse, however, is not true. In general, a dream is less rich in affects than
the psychic material from which it is elaborated. When I have reconstructed the dream-thoughts, I see that the most intense psychic impulses are
constantly striving in them for self-assertion, usually in conflict with others which are sharply opposed to them. Now, if I turn back to the dream.
I often find it colourless and devoid of any very intensive affective tone. Not only the content, but also the affective tone of my thoughts is often
reduced by the dream-work to the level of the indifferent. I might say that a suppression of the affects has been accomplished by the dream-work.
Take, for example, the dream of the botanical monograph. It corresponds to a passionate plea for my freedom to act as I am acting, to arrange my
life as seems right to me, and to me alone. The dream which results from this sounds indifferent; I have written a monograph; it is lying before
me; it is provided with coloured plates, and dried plants are to be found in each copy. It is like the peace of a deserted battlefield; no trace is left
of the tumult of battle.
But things may turn out quite differently; vivid expressions of affect may enter into the dream itself; but we will first of all consider the
unquestioned fact that so many dreams appear indifferent, whereas it is never possible to go deeply into the dream-thoughts without deep
emotion.
The complete theoretical explanation of this suppression of affects during the dream-work cannot be given here; it would require a most careful
investigation of the theory of the affects and of the mechanism of repression. Here I can put forward only two suggestions. I am forced - for other
reasons - to conceive the liberation of affects as a centrifugal process directed towards the interior of the body, analogous to the processes of
motor and secretory innervation. Just as in the sleeping state the emission of motor impulses towards the outer world seems to be suspended, so
the centrifugal awakening of affects by unconscious thinking during sleep may be rendered more difficult. The affective impulses which occur
during the course of the dream-thoughts may thus in themselves be feeble, so that those that find their way into the dream are no stronger.
According to this line of thought, the suppression of the affects would not be a consequence of the dream-work at all, but a consequence of the
state of sleep. This may be so, but it cannot possibly be all the truth. We must remember that all the more complex dreams have revealed
themselves as the result of a compromise between conflicting psychic forces. On the one hand, the wish-forming thoughts have to oppose the
contradiction of a censorship; on the other hand, as we have often seen, even in unconscious thinking, every train of thought is harnessed to its
contradictory counterpart. Since all these trains of thought are capable of arousing affects, we shall, broadly speaking, hardly go astray if we
conceive the suppression of affects as the result of the inhibition which the contrasts impose upon one another, and the censorship upon the urges
which it has suppressed. The inhibition of affects would accordingly be the second consequence of the dream-censorship, just as dream-distortion
was the first consequence. 
I will here insert an example of a dream in which the indifferent emotional tone of the dream-content may be explained by the antagonism of the
dream-thoughts. I must relate the following short dream, which every reader will read with disgust. 

Rising ground, and on it something like an open-air latrine; a very long bench, at the end of which is a wide aperture. The whole of the back edge
is thickly covered with little heaps of excrement of all sizes and degrees of freshness. A thicket behind the bench. I urinate upon the bench; a long
stream of urine rinses everything clean, the patches of excrement come off easily and fall into the opening. Nevertheless, it seems as though
something remained at the end.
Why did I experience no disgust in this dream?
Because, as the analysis shows, the most pleasant and gratifying thoughts have cooperated in the formation of this dream. Upon analysing it, I
immediately think of the Augean stables which were cleansed by Hercules. I am this Hercules. The rising ground and the thicket belong to
Aussee, where my children are now staying. I have discovered the infantile aetiology of the neuroses, and have thus guarded my own children
from falling ill. The bench (omitting the aperture, of course) is the faithful copy of a piece of furniture of which an affectionate female patient has
made me a present. This reminds me how my patients honour me. Even the museum of human excrement is susceptible of a gratifying
interpretation. However much it disgusts me, it is a souvenir of the beautiful land of Italy, where in the small cities, as everyone knows, the
privies are not equipped in any other way. The stream of urine that washes everything clean is an unmistakable allusion to greatness. It is in this
manner that Gulliver extinguishes the great fire in Lilliput; to be sure, he thereby incurs the displeasure of the tiniest of queens. In this way, too,
Gargantua, the superman of Master Rabelais, takes vengeance upon the Parisians, straddling Notre-Dame and training his stream of urine upon
the city. Only yesterday I was turning over the leaves of Garnier's illustrations to Rabelais before I went to bed. And, strangely enough, here is
another proof that I am the superman! The platform of Notre-Dame was my favourite nook in Paris; every free afternoon I used to go up into the
towers of the cathedral and there clamber about between the monsters and gargoyles. The circumstance that all the excrement vanishes so rapidly
before the stream of urine corresponds to the motto: Afflavit et dissipati sunt, which I shall some day make the title of a chapter on the
therapeutics of hysteria.
And now as to the affective occasion of the dream. It had been a hot summer afternoon; in the evening, I had given my lecture on the connection
between hysteria and the perversions, and everything which I had to say displeased me thoroughly, and seemed utterly valueless. I was tired; I
took not the least pleasure in my difficult work, and longed to get away from this rummaging in human filth; first to see my children, and then to
revisit the beauties of Italy. In this mood I went from the lecture-hall to a cafe to get some little refreshment in the open air, for my appetite had
forsaken me. But a member of my audience went with me; he begged for permission to sit with me while I drank my coffee and gulped down my
roll, and began to say flattering things to me. He told me how much he had learned from me, that he now saw everything through different eyes,
that I had cleansed the Augean stables of error and prejudice, which encumbered the theory of the neuroses - in short, that I was a very great man.
My mood was ill-suited to his hymn of praise; I struggled with my disgust, and went home earlier in order to get rid of him; and before I went to
sleep I turned over the leaves of Rabelais, and read a short story by C. F. Meyer entitled Die Leiden eines Knaben (The Sorrows of a Boy).
The dream had originated from this material, and Meyer's novel had supplied the recollections of scenes of childhood.[95] The day's mood of
annoyance and disgust is continued in the dream, inasmuch as it is permitted to furnish nearly all the material for the dream-content. But during
the night the opposite mood of vigorous, even immoderate self-assertion awakened and dissipated the earlier mood. The dream had to assume
such a form as would accommodate both the expressions of self-depreciation and exaggerated self-glorification in the same material. This
compromise-formation resulted in an ambiguous dream-content, but, owing to the mutual inhibition of the opposites, in an indifferent emotional
tone.
According to the theory of wish-fulfilment, this dream would not have been possible had not the opposed, and indeed suppressed, yet pleasureemphasized megalomanic train of thought been added to the thoughts of disgust. For nothing painful is intended to be represented in dreams; the
painful elements of our daily thoughts are able to force their way into our dreams only if at the same time they are able to disguise a wishfulfilment.
The dream-work is able to dispose of the affects of the dream-thoughts in yet another way than by admitting them or reducing them to zero. It can
transform them into their opposites. We are acquainted with the rule that for the purposes of interpretation every element of the dream may
represent its opposite, as well as itself. One can never tell beforehand which is to be posited; only the context can decide this point. A suspicion of
this state of affairs has evidently found its way into the popular consciousness; the dream-books, in their interpretations, often proceed according
to the principle of contraries. This transformation into the contrary is made possible by the intimate associative ties which in our thoughts connect
the idea of a thing with that of its opposite. Like every other displacement, this serves the purposes of the censorship, but it is often the work of
wish-fulfilment, for wish-fulfilment consists in nothing more than the substitution of an unwelcome thing by its opposite. Just as concrete images
may be transformed into their contraries in our dreams, so also may the affects of the dream-thoughts, and it is probable that this inversion of
affects is usually brought about by the dream-censorship. The suppression and inversion of affects is useful even in social life, as is shown by the 
familiar analogy of the dream-censorship and, above all, hypocrisy. If I am conversing with a person to whom I must show consideration while I
should like to address him as an enemy, it is almost more important that I should conceal the expression of my affect from him than that I should
modify the verbal expression of my thoughts. If I address him in courteous terms, but accompany them by looks or gestures of hatred and disdain,
the effect which I produce upon him is not very different from what it would have been had I cast my unmitigated contempt into his face. Above
all, then, the censorship bids me suppress my affects. and if I am a master of the art of dissimulation I can hypocritically display the opposite
affect - smiling where I should like to be angry, and pretending affection where I should like to destroy.
We have already had an excellent example of such an inversion of affect in the service of the dream-censorship. In the dream of my uncle's beard
I feel great affection for my friend R, while (and because) the dream-thoughts berate him as a simpleton. From this example of the inversion of
affects we derived our first proof of the existence of the censorship. Even here it is not necessary to assume that the dream-work creates a counteraffect of this kind that is altogether new; it usually finds it lying ready in the material of the dream-thoughts, and merely intensifies it with the
psychic force of the defence-motives until it is able to predominate in the dream-formation. In the dream of my uncle, the affectionate counteraffect probably has its origin in an infantile source (as the continuation of the dream would suggest), for owing to the peculiar nature of my
earliest childhood experiences the relation of uncle and nephew has become the source of all my friendships and hatreds (cf. analysis chapter VI.,
F.).
An excellent example of such a reversal of affect is found in a dream recorded by Ferenczi.[96] "An elderly gentleman was awakened at night by
his wife, who was frightened because he laughed so loudly and uncontrollably in his sleep. The man afterwards related that he had had the
following dream: I lay in my bed, a gentleman known to me came in, I wanted to turn on the light, but I could not; I attempted to do so
repeatedly, but in vain. Thereupon my wife got out of bed, in order to help me, but she, too, was unable to manage it; being ashamed of her
neglige in the presence of the gentleman, she finally gave it up and went back to her bed; all this was so comical that I had to laugh terribly. My
wife said: 'What are you laughing at, what are you laughing at?' but I continued to laugh until I woke. The following day the man was extremely
depressed, and suffered from headache: 'From too much laughter, which shook me up,' he thought.
"Analytically considered, the dream looks less comical. In the latent dream-thoughts the gentleman known to him who came into the room is the
image of death as the 'great unknown,' which was awakened in his mind on the previous day. The old gentleman, who suffers from
arteriosclerosis, had good reason to think of death on the day before the dream. The uncontrollable laughter takes the place of weeping and
sobbing at the idea that he has to die. It is the light of life that he is no longer able to turn on. This mournful thought may have associated itself
with a failure to effect sexual intercourse, which he had attempted shortly before this, and in which the assistance of his wife en neglige was of no
avail; he realized that he was already on the decline. The dream-work knew how to transform the sad idea of impotence and death into a comic
scene, and the sobbing into laughter."
There is one class of dreams which has a special claim to be called hypocritical, and which severely tests the theory of wish-fulfilment. My
attention was called to them when Frau Dr. M. Hilferding proposed for discussion by the Psychoanalytic Society of Vienna a dream recorded by
Rosegger, which is here reprinted:
In Waldheimat, vol. xi, Rosegger writes as follows in his story, Fremd gemacht (p. 303):
"I usually enjoy healthful sleep, yet I have gone without repose on many a night; in addition to my modest existence as a student and literary man,
I have for long years dragged out the shadow of a veritable tailor's life - like a ghost from which I could not become divorced.
"It is not true that I have occupied myself very often or very intensely with thoughts of my past during the day. A stormer of heaven and earth
who has escaped from the hide of the Philistine has other things to think about. And as a gay young fellow, I hardly gave a thought to my
nocturnal dreams; only later, when I had formed the habit of thinking about everything, or when the Philistine within me began to assert itself a
little, did it strike me that - when I dreamed at all - I was always a journeyman tailor, and that in that capacity I had already worked in my master's
shop for a long time without any pay. As I sat there beside him, and sewed and pressed, I was perfectly well aware that I no longer belonged
there, and that as a burgess of the town I had other things to attend to; but I was always on a holiday, or away in the country, and so I sat beside
my master and helped him. I often felt far from comfortable about it, and regretted the waste of time which I might have employed for better and
more useful purposes. If anything was not quite correct in measure and cut I had to put up with a scolding from my master. Of wages there was
never a question. Often, as I sat with bent back in the dark workshop, I decided to give notice and make myself scarce. Once I actually did so, but
the master took no notice of me, and next time I was sitting beside him again and sewing.
"How happy I was when I woke up after such weary hours! And I then resolved that, if this intrusive dream should ever occur again, I would
energetically throw it off, and would cry aloud: 'It is only a delusion, I am lying in bed, and I want to sleep'... And the next night I would be
sitting in the tailor's shop again.
"So it went on for years, with dismal regularity. Once when the master and I were working at Alpelhofer's, at the house of the peasant with whom
I began my apprenticeship, it happened that my master was particularly dissatisfied with my work. 'I should like to know where in the world your
thoughts are?' he cried, and looked at me sullenly. I thought the most sensible thing to do would be to get up and explain to the master that I was 
working with him only as a favour, and then take my leave. But I did not do this. I even submitted when the master engaged an apprentice, and
ordered me to make room for him on the bench. I moved into the corner, and kept on sewing. On the same day another journeyman was engaged;
a bigoted fellow; he was the Bohemian who had worked for us nineteen years earlier, and then had fallen into the lake on his way home from the
public-house. When he tried to sit down there was no room for him. I looked at the master inquiringly, and he said to me: 'You have no talent for
tailoring; you may go; you're a stranger henceforth.' My fright on that occasion was so overpowering that I woke.
"The grey of morning glimmered through the clear windows of my familiar home. Objets d'art surrounded me; in the tasteful bookcase stood the
eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante, the incomparable Shakespeare, the glorious Goethe - all radiant and immortal. From the adjoining room
resounded the clear little voices of the children, who were waking up and prattling to their mother. I felt as though I had rediscovered that
idyllically sweet, peaceful, poetical and spiritualized life in which I have so often and so deeply been conscious of contemplative human
happiness. And yet I was vexed that I had not given my master notice first, but had been dismissed by him.
"And how remarkable this seems to me: since that night, when my master 'made a stranger' of me, I have enjoyed restful sleep; I no longer dream
of my tailoring days, which now lie in the remote past: which in their unpretentious simplicity were really so cheerful, but which, none the less,
have cast a long shadow over the later years of my life."
In this series of dreams of a poet who, in his younger years, had been a journeyman tailor, it is hard to recognize the domination of the wishfulfilment. All the delightful things occurred in his waking life, while the dream seemed to drag along with it the ghost-like shadow of an
unhappy existence which had long been forgotten. Dreams of my own of a similar character enable me to give some explanation of such dreams.
As a young doctor, I worked for a long time in the Chemical Institute without being able to accomplish anything in that exacting science, so that
in the waking state I never think about this unfruitful and actually somewhat humiliating period of my student days. On the other hand, I have a
recurring dream to the effect that I am working in the laboratory, making analyses, and experiments, and so forth; these dreams, like the
examination-dreams, are disagreeable, and they are never very distinct. During the analysis of one of these dreams my attention was directed to
the word analysis, which gave me the key to an understanding of them. Since then I have become an analyst. I make analyses which are greatly
praised - psycho-analyses, of course. Now I understand: when I feel proud of these analyses in my waking life, and feel inclined to boast of my
achievements, my dreams hold up to me at night those other, unsuccessful analyses, of which I have no reason to be proud; they are the punitive
dreams of the upstart, like those of the journeyman tailor who became a celebrated poet. But how is it possible for a dream to place itself at the
service of self-criticism in its conflict with parvenu pride, and to take as its content a rational warning instead of a prohibited wish-fulfilment? I
have already hinted that the answer to this question presents many difficulties. We may conclude that the foundation of the dream consisted at
first of an arrogant phantasy of ambition; but that in its stead only its suppression and abasement has reached the dream-content. One must
remember that there are masochistic tendencies in mental life to which such an inversion might be attributed. I see no objection to regarding such
dreams as punishment-dreams, as distinguished from wish-fulfilling dreams. I should not see in this any limitation of the theory of dreams
hitherto as presented, but merely a verbal concession to the point of view to which the convergence of contraries seems strange. But a more
thorough investigation of individual dreams of this class allows us to recognize yet another element. In an indistinct, subordinate portion of one of
my laboratory dreams, I was just at the age which placed me in the most gloomy and most unsuccessful year of my professional career; I still had
no position, and no idea how I was going to support myself, when I suddenly found that I had the choice of several women whom I might marry!
I was, therefore, young again and, what is more, she was young again - the woman who has shared with me all these difficult years. In this way,
one of the wishes which constantly gnaws at the heart of the aging man was revealed as the unconscious dream-instigator. The conflict raging in
other psychic strata between vanity and self-criticism had certainly determined the dream-content, but the more deeply-rooted wish for youth had
alone made it possible as a dream. One often says to oneself even in the waking state: "To be sure, things are going well with you today, and once
you found life very hard; but, after all, life was sweet in those days, when you were still so young." [97]
Another group of dreams, which I have often myself experienced, and which I have recognized to be hypocritical, have as their content a
reconciliation with persons with whom one has long ceased to have friendly relations. The analysis constantly discovers an occasion which might
well induce me to cast aside the last remnants of consideration for these former friends, and to treat them as strangers or enemies. But the dream
chooses to depict the contrary relation.
In considering dreams recorded by a novelist or poet, we may often enough assume that he has excluded from the record those details which he
felt to be disturbing and regarded as unessential. His dreams thus set us a problem which could be readily solved if we had an exact reproduction
of the dream-content.
O. Rank has called my attention to the fact that in Grimm's fairy-tale of the valiant little tailor, or Seven at One Stroke, there is related a very
similar dream of an upstart. The tailor, who has become a hero, and has married the king's daughter, dreams one night while lying beside the
princess, his wife, about his trade; having become suspicious, on the following night she places armed guards where they can listen to what is said
by the dreamer, and arrest him. But the little tailor is warned, and is able to correct his dream.
The complicated processes of removal, diminution, and inversion by which the affects of the dream-thoughts finally become the affects of the
dream may be very well survived in suitable syntheses of completely analysed dreams. I shall here discuss a few examples of affective
manifestations in dreams which will, I think, prove this conclusively in some of the cases cited. \

In the dream about the odd task which the elder Brucke sets me - that of preparing my own pelvis - I am aware in the dream itself of not feeling
appropriate horror. Now this is a wish-fulfilment in more senses than one. The preparation signifies the self-analyses which I perform, as it were,
by publishing my book on dreams, which I actually found so painful that I postponed the printing of the completed manuscript for more than a
year. The wish now arises that I may disregard this feeling of aversion, and for that reason I feel no horror (Grauen, which also means to grow
grey) in the dream. I should much like to escape Grauen in the other sense too, for I am already growing quite grey, and the grey in my hair warns
me to delay no longer. For we know that at the end of the dream this thought secures representation: "I shall have to leave my children to reach
the goal of their difficult journey without my help."
In the two dreams that transfer the expression of satisfaction to the moments immediately after waking, this satisfaction is in the one case
motivated by the expectation that I am now going to learn what is meant by I have already dreamed of this, and refers in reality to the birth of my
first child, and in the other case it is motivated by the conviction that "that which has been announced by a premonitory sign" is now going to
happen, and the satisfaction is that which I felt on the arrival of my second son. Here the same affects that dominated in the dream-thoughts have
remained in the dream, but the process is probably not quite so simple as this in any dream. If the two analyses are examined a little more closely
it will be seen that this satisfaction, which does not succumb to the censorship, receives reinforcement from a source which must fear the
censorship, and whose affect would certainly have aroused opposition if it had not screened itself by a similar and readily admitted affect of
satisfaction from the permitted source, and had, so to speak, sneaked in behind it. I am unfortunately unable to show this in the case of the actual
dream, but an example from another situation will make my meaning intelligible. I will put the following case: Let there be a person near me
whom I hate so strongly that I have a lively impulse to rejoice should anything happen to him. But the moral side of my nature does not give way
to this impulse; I do not dare to express this sinister wish, and when something does happen to him which he does not deserve I suppress my
satisfaction, and force myself to thoughts and expressions of regret. Everyone will at some time have found himself in such a position. But now
let it happen that the hated person, through some transgression of his own, draws upon himself a well-deserved calamity; I shall now be allowed
to give free rein to my satisfaction at his being visited by a just punishment, and I shall be expressing an opinion which coincides with that of
other impartial persons. But I observe that my satisfaction proves to be more intense than that of others, for it has received reinforcement from
another source - from my hatred, which was hitherto prevented by the inner censorship from furnishing the affect, but which, under the altered
circumstances, is no longer prevented from doing so. This case generally occurs in social life when antipathetic persons or the adherents of an
unpopular minority have been guilty of some offence. Their punishment is then usually commensurate not with their guilt, but with their guilt
plus the ill-will against them that has hitherto not been put into effect. Those who punish them doubtless commit an injustice, but they are
prevented from becoming aware of it by the satisfaction arising from the release within themselves of a suppression of long standing. In such
cases the quality of the affect is justified, but not its degree; and the self-criticism that has been appeased in respect of the first point is only too
ready to neglect to scrutinize the second point. Once you have opened the doors, more people enter than it was your original intention to admit.
A striking feature of the neurotic character, namely, that in it causes capable of evoking affect produce results which are qualitatively justified but
quantitatively excessive, is to be explained on these lines, in so far as it admits of a psychological explanation at all. But the excess of affect
proceeds from unconscious and hitherto suppressed affective sources which are able to establish an associative connection with the actual
occasion, and for whose liberation of affect the unprotested and permitted source of affects opens up the desired path. Our attention is thus called
to the fact that the relation of mutual inhibition must not be regarded as the only relation obtaining between the suppressed and the suppressing
psychic institution. The cases in which the two institutions bring about a pathological result by co-operation and mutual reinforcement deserve
just as much attention. These hints regarding the psychic mechanism will contribute to our understanding of the expressions of affects in dreams.
A gratification which makes its appearance in a dream, and which, of course, may readily be found in its proper place in the dream-thoughts, may
not always be fully explained by means of this reference. As a rule, it is necessary to search for a second source in the dream-thoughts, upon
which the pressure of the censorship rests, and which, under this pressure, would have yielded not gratification but the contrary affect, had it not
been enabled by the presence of the first dream-source to free its gratification-affect from repression, and reinforce the gratification springing
from the other source. Hence affects which appear in dreams appear to be formed by the confluence of several tributaries, and are overdetermined in respect of the material of the dream-thoughts. Sources of affect which are able to furnish the same affect combine in the dreamwork in order to produce it.[98]
Some insight into these involved relations is gained from the analysis of the admirable dream in which Non vixit constitutes the central point (cf.
chapter VI., F). In this dream expressions of affect of different qualities are concentrated at two points in the manifest content. Hostile and painful
impulses (in the dream itself we have the phrase overcome by strange emotions) overlap one another at the point where I destroy my antagonistic
friend with a couple of words. At the end of the dream I am greatly pleased, and am quite ready to believe in a possibility which I recognize as
absurd when I am awake, namely, that there are revenants who can be swept away by a mere wish.
I have not yet mentioned the occasion of this dream. It is an important one, and leads us far down into the meaning of the dream. From my friend
in Berlin (whom I have designated as Fl) I had received the news that he was about to undergo an operation, and that relatives of his living in
Vienna would inform me as to his condition. The first few messages after the operation were not very reassuring, and caused me great anxiety. I
should have liked to go to him myself, but at that time I was afflicted with a painful complaint which made every movement a torment. I now
learn from the dream-thoughts that I feared for this dear friend's life. I knew that his only sister, with whom I had never been acquainted, had died
young, after a very brief illness. (In the dream Fl tells me about his sister, and says: "In three-quarters of an hour she was dead.") I must have 
imagined that his own constitution was not much stronger, and that I should soon be travelling, in spite of my health, in response to far worse
news - and that I should arrive too late, for which I should eternally reproach myself.[99] This reproach, that I should arrive too late, has become
the central point of the dream, but it has been represented in a scene in which the revered teacher of my student years - Brucke - reproaches me
for the same thing with a terrible look from his blue eyes. What brought about this alteration of the scene will soon become apparent: the dream
cannot reproduce the scene itself as I experienced it. To be sure, it leaves the blue eyes to the other man, but it gives me the part of the annihilator,
an inversion which is obviously the work of the wish-fulfilment. My concern for the life of my friend, my self-reproach for not having gone to
him, my shame (he had come to me in Vienna unobtrusively), my desire to consider myself excused on account of my illness - all this builds up
an emotional tempest which is distinctly felt in my sleep, and which rages in that region of the dream-thoughts.
But there was another thing in the occasion of the dream which had quite the opposite effect. With the unfavourable news during the first days of
the operation I received also an injunction to speak to no one about the whole affair, which hurt my feelings, for it betrayed an unnecessary
distrust of my discretion. I knew, of course, that this request did not proceed from my friend, but that it was due to clumsiness or excessive
timidity on the part of the messenger; yet the concealed reproach affected me very disagreeably, because it was not altogether unjustified. As we
know, only reproaches which have something in them have the power to hurt. Years ago, when I was younger than I am now, I knew two men
who were friends, and who honoured me with their friendship; and I quite superfluously told one of them what the other had said of him. This
incident, of course, had nothing to do with the affairs of my friend Fl, but I have never forgotten the reproaches to which I had to listen on that
occasion. One of the two friends between whom I made trouble was Professor Fleischl; the other one I will call by his baptismal name, Josef, a
name which was borne also by my friend and antagonist P, who appears in this dream.
In the dream the element unobtrusively points to the reproach that I cannot keep anything to myself, and so does the question of Fl as to how
much of his affairs I have told P. But it is the intervention of that old memory which transposes the reproach for arriving too late from the present
to the time when I was working in Brucke's laboratory; and by replacing the second person in the annihilation scene of the dream by a Josef, I
enable this scene to represent not only the first reproach - that I have arrived too late - but also that other reproach, more strongly affected by the
repression, to the effect that I do not keep secrets. The work of condensation and displacement in this dream, as well as the motives for it, are now
obvious.
My present trivial annoyance at the injunction not to divulge secrets draws reinforcement from springs that flow far beneath the surface, and so
swells to a stream of hostile impulses towards persons who are in reality dear to me. The source which furnishes the reinforcement is to be found
in my childhood. I have already said that my warm friendships as well as my enmities with persons of my own age go back to my childish
relations to my nephew, who was a year older than I. In these he had the upper hand, and I early learned how to defend myself; we lived together,
were inseparable, and loved one another, but at times, as the statements of older persons testify, we used to squabble and accuse one another. In a
certain sense, all my friends are incarnations of this first figure; they are all revenants. My nephew himself returned when a young man, and then
we were like Caesar and Brutus. An intimate friend and a hated enemy have always been indispensable to my emotional life; I have always been
able to create them anew, and not infrequently my childish ideal has been so closely approached that friend and enemy have coincided in the same
person; but not simultaneously, of course, nor in constant alternation, as was the case in my early childhood.
How, when such associations exist, a recent occasion of emotion may cast back to the infantile occasion and substitute this as a cause of affect, I
shall not consider now. Such an investigation would properly belong to the psychology of unconscious thought, or a psychological explanation of
the neuroses. Let us assume, for the purposes of dream-interpretation, that a childish recollection presents itself, or is created by the phantasy
with, more or less, the following content: We two children quarrel on account of some object - just what we shall leave undecided, although the
memory, or illusion of memory, has a very definite object in view - and each claims that he got there first, and therefore has the first right to it.
We come to blows; Might comes before Right; and, according to the indications of the dream, I must have known that I was in the wrong
(noticing the error myself); but this time I am the stronger, and take possession of the battlefield; the defeated combatant hurries to my father, his
grandfather, and accuses me, and I defend myself with the words, which I have heard from my father: "I hit him because he hit me." Thus, this
recollection, or more probably phantasy, which forces itself upon my attention in the course of the analysis - without further evidence I myself do
not know how - becomes a central item of the dream-thoughts, which collects the affective impulses prevailing in the dream-thoughts, as the bowl
of a fountain collects the water that flows into it. From this point the dream-thoughts flow along the following channels: "It serves you right that
you have had to make way for me; why did you try to push me off? I don't need you; I'll soon find someone else to play with," etc. Then the
channels are opened through which these thoughts flow back again into the dream-representation. For such an "ote-toi que je m'y mette,"[100] I
once had to reproach my deceased friend Josef. He was next to me in the line of promotion in Brucke's laboratory, but advancement there was
very slow. Neither of the two assistants budged from his place, and youth became impatient. My friend, who knew that his days were numbered,
and was bound by no intimate relation to his superior, sometimes gave free expression to his impatience. As this superior was a man seriously ill,
the wish to see him removed by promotion was susceptible of an obnoxious secondary interpretation. Several years earlier, to be sure, I myself
had cherished, even more intensely, the same wish - to obtain a post which had fallen vacant; wherever there are gradations of rank and
promotion the way is opened for the suppression of covetous wishes. Shakespeare's Prince Hal cannot rid himself of the temptation to see how the
crown fits, even at the bedside of his sick father. But, as may readily be understood, the dream inflicts this inconsiderate wish not upon me, but
upon my friend.[101]
"As he was ambitious, I slew him." As he could not expect that the other man would make way for him, the man himself has been put out of the
way. I harbour these thoughts immediately after attending the unveiling of the memorial to the other man at the University. Part of the satisfaction 
which I feel in the dream may therefore be interpreted: A just punishment; it serves you right.
At the funeral of this friend a young man made the following remark, which seemed rather out of place: "The preacher talked as though the world
could no longer exist without this one human being." Here was a stirring of revolt in the heart of a sincere man, whose grief had been disturbed by
exaggeration. But with this speech are connected the dream-thoughts: "No one is really irreplaceable; how many men have I already escorted to
the grave! But I am still alive; I have survived them all; I claim the field." Such a thought, at the moment when I fear that if I make a journey to
see him I shall find my friend no longer among the living, permits only of the further development that I am glad once more to have survived
someone; that it is not I who have died but he; that I am master of the field, as once I was in the imagined scene of my childhood. This
satisfaction, infantile in origin, at the fact that I am master of the field, covers the greater part of the affect which appears in the dream. I am glad
that I am the survivor; I express this sentiment with the naive egoism of the husband who says to his wife: "If one of us dies, I shall move to
Paris." My expectation takes it as a matter of course that I am not the one to die.
It cannot be denied that great self-control is needed to interpret one's dreams and to report them. One has to reveal oneself as the sole villain
among all the noble souls with whom one shares the breath of life. Thus, I find it quite comprehensible that revenants should exist only as long as
one wants them, and that they can be obliterated by a wish. It was for this reason that my friend Josef was punished. But the revenants are the
successive incarnations of the friend of my childhood; I am also gratified at having replaced this person for myself over and over again, and a
substitute will doubtless soon be found even for the friend whom I am now on the point of losing. No one is irreplaceable.
But what has the dream-censorship been doing in the meantime? Why does it not raise the most emphatic objection to a train of thoughts
characterized by such brutal selfishness, and transform the satisfaction inherent therein into extreme discomfort? I think it is because other
unobjectionable trains of thought referring to the same persons result also in satisfaction, and with their affect cover that proceeding from the
forbidden infantile sources. In another stratum of thought I said to myself, at the ceremony of unveiling the memorial: "I have lost so many dear
friends, some through death, some through the dissolution of friendship; is it not good that substitutes have presented themselves, that I have
gained a friend who means more to me than the others could, and whom I shall now always retain, at an age when it is not easy to form new
friendships?" The gratification of having found this substitute for my lost friend can be taken over into the dream without interference, but behind
it there sneaks in the hostile feeling of malicious gratification from the infantile source. Childish affection undoubtedly helps to reinforce the
rational affection of today; but childish hatred also has found its way into the representation.
But besides this, there is in the dream a distinct reference to another train of thoughts which may result in gratification. Some time before this,
after long waiting, a little daughter was born to my friend. I knew how he had grieved for the sister whom he had lost at an early age, and I wrote
to him that I felt that he would transfer to this child the love he had felt for her, that this little girl would at last make him forget his irreparable
loss.
Thus this train also connects up with the intermediary thoughts of the latent dream-content, from which paths radiate in the most contrary
directions: "No one is irreplaceable. See, here are only revenants; all those whom one has lost return." And now the bonds of association between
the contradictory components of the dream-thoughts are more tightly drawn by the accidental circumstance that my friend's little daughter bears
the same name as the girl playmate of my own youth, who was just my own age, and the sister of my oldest friend and antagonist. I heard the
name Pauline with satisfaction, and in order to allude to this coincidence I replaced one Josef in the dream by another Josef, and found it
impossible to suppress the identical initials in the name Fleischl and Fl. From this point a train of thought runs to the naming of my own children.
I insisted that the names should not be chosen according to the fashion of the day, but should be determined by regard for the memory of those
dear to us. The children's names make them revenants. And, finally, is not the procreation of children for all men the only way of access to
immortality?
I shall add only a few observations as to the affects of dreams considered from another point of view. In the psyche of the sleeper an affective
tendency - what we call a mood - may be contained as its dominating element, and may induce a corresponding mood in the dream. This mood
may be the result of the experiences and thoughts of the day, or it may be of somatic origin; in either case it will be accompanied by the
corresponding trains of thought. That this ideational content of the dream-thoughts should at one time determine the affective tendency primarily,
while at another time it is awakened in a secondary manner by the somatically determined emotional disposition, is indifferent for the purposes of
dream-formation. This is always subject to the restriction that it can represent only a wish-fulfilment, and that it may lend its psychic energy to
the wish alone. The mood actually present will receive the same treatment as the sensation which actually emerges during sleep (Cf. chapter V.,
C), which is either neglected or reinterpreted in the sense of a wish-fulfilment. Painful moods during sleep become the motive force of the dream,
inasmuch as they awake energetic wishes which the dream has to fulfil. The material in which they inhere is elaborated until it is serviceable for
the expression of the wish-fulfilment. The more intense and the more dominating the element of the painful mood in the dream-thoughts, the
more surely will the most strongly suppressed wish-impulses take advantage of the opportunity to secure representation; for thanks to the actual
existence of discomfort, which otherwise they would have to create, they find that the more difficult part of the work necessary to ensure
representation has already been accomplished; and with these observations we touch once more upon the problem of anxiety-dreams, which will
prove to be the boundary-case of dream-activity. 

We will at last turn our attention to the fourth of the factors participating in dream-formation.
If we continue our investigation of the dream-content on the lines already laid down - that is, by examining the origin in the dream-thoughts of
conspicuous occurrences - we come upon elements that can be explained only by making an entirely new assumption. I have in mind cases where
one manifests astonishment, anger, or resistance in a dream, and that, too, in respect of part of the dream-content itself. Most of these impulses of
criticism in dreams are not directed against the dream-content, but prove to be part of the dream-material, taken over and fittingly applied, as I
have already shown by suitable examples. There are, however, criticisms of this sort which are not so derived: their correlatives cannot be found
in the dream-material. What, for instance, is meant by the criticism not infrequent in dreams: "After all, it's only a dream"? This is a genuine
criticism of the dream, such as I might make if I were awake, Not infrequently it is only the prelude to waking; even oftener it is preceded by a
painful feeling, which subsides when the actuality of the dream-state has been affirmed. The thought: "After all, it's only a dream" in the dream
itself has the same intention as it has on the stage on the lips of Offenbach's Belle Helene; it seeks to minimize what has just been experienced,
and to secure indulgence for what is to follow. It serves to lull to sleep a certain mental agency which at the given moment has every occasion to
rouse itself and forbid the continuation of the dream, or the scene. But it is more convenient to go on sleeping and to tolerate the dream, "because,
after all, it's only a dream." I imagine that the disparaging criticism: "After all, it's only a dream," appears in the dream at the moment when the
censorship. which is never quite asleep, feels that it has been surprised by the already admitted dream. It is too late to suppress the dream, and the
agency therefore meets with this remark the anxiety or painful emotion which rises into the dream. It is an expression of the esprit d'escalier on
the part of the psychic censorship.
In this example we have incontestable proof that everything which the dream contains does not come from the dream-thoughts, but that a psychic
function, which cannot be differentiated from our waking thoughts, may make contributions to the dream-content. The question arises, does this
occur only in exceptional cases, or does the psychic agency, which is otherwise active only as the censorship, play a constant part in dreamformation?
One must decide unhesitatingly for the latter view. It is indisputable that the censoring agency, whose influence we have so far recognized only in
the restrictions of and omissions in the dream-content, is likewise responsible for interpolations in and amplifications of this content. Often these
interpolations are readily recognized; they are introduced with hesitation, prefaced by an "as if"; they have no special vitality of their own, and are
constantly inserted at points where they may serve to connect two portions of the dream-content or create a continuity between two sections of the
dream. They manifest less ability to adhere in the memory than do the genuine products of the dream-material; if the dream is forgotten, they are
forgotten first, and I strongly suspect that our frequent complaint that although we have dreamed so much we have forgotten most of the dream,
and have remembered only fragments, is explained by the immediate falling away of just these cementing thoughts. In a complete analysis, these
interpolations are often betrayed by the fact that no material is to be found for them in the dream-thoughts. But after careful examination I must
describe this case as the less usual one; in most cases the interpolated thoughts can be traced to material in the dream-thoughts which can claim a
place in the dream neither by its own merits nor by way of over-determination. Only in the most extreme cases does the psychic function in dreamformation which we are now considering rise to original creation; whenever possible it makes use of anything appropriate that it can find in the
dream-material.
What distinguishes this part of the dream-work, and also betrays it, is its tendency. This function proceeds in a manner which the poet maliciously
attributes to the philosopher: with its rags and tatters it stops up the breaches in the structure of the dream. The result of its efforts is that the
dream loses the appearance of absurdity and incoherence, and approaches the pattern of an intelligible experience. But the effort is not always
crowned with complete success. Thus, dreams occur which may, upon superficial examination, seem faultlessly logical and correct; they start
from a possible situation, continue it by means of consistent changes, and bring it - although this is rare - to a not unnatural conclusion. These
dreams have been subjected to the most searching elaboration by a psychic function similar to our waking thought; they seem to have a meaning,
but this meaning is very far removed from the real meaning of the dream. If we analyse them, we are convinced that the secondary elaboration has
handled the material with the greatest freedom, and has retained as little as possible of its proper relations. These are the dreams which have, so to
speak, already been once interpreted before we subject them to waking interpretation. In other dreams this tendencious elaboration has succeeded
only up to a point; up to this point consistency seems to prevail, but then the dream becomes nonsensical or confused; but perhaps before it
concludes it may once more rise to a semblance of rationality In yet other dreams the elaboration has failed completely; we find ourselves
helpless, confronted with a senseless mass of fragmentary contents.
I do not wish to deny to this fourth dream-forming power, which will soon become familiar to us - it is in reality the only one of the four dreamcreating factors which is familiar to us in other connections - I do not wish to deny to this fourth factor the faculty of creatively making new
contributions to our dreams. But its influence is certainly exerted, like that of the other factors, mainly in the preference and selection of psychic
material already formed in the dream-thoughts. Now there is a case where it is to a great extent spared the work of building, as it were, a facade to
the dream by the fact that such a structure, only waiting to be used, already exists in the material of the dream-thoughts. I am accustomed to
describe the element of the dream-thoughts which I have in mind as phantasy; I shall perhaps avoid misunderstanding if I at once point to the daydream as an analogy in waking life.[102] The part played by this element in our psychic life has not yet been fully recognized and revealed by
psychiatrists; though M. Benedikt has, it seems to me, made a highly promising beginning. Yet the significance of the day-dream has not escaped
the unerring insight of the poets; we are all familiar with the description of the day-dreams of one of his subordinate characters which Alphonse
Daudet has given us in his Nabab. The study of the psychoneuroses discloses the astonishing fact that these phantasies or day-dreams are the
immediate predecessors of symptoms of hysteria - at least, of a great many of them; for hysterical symptoms are dependent not upon actual 
memories, but upon the phantasies built up on a basis of memories. The frequent occurrence of conscious day-phantasies brings these formations
to our ken; but while some of these phantasies are conscious, there is a super-abundance of unconscious phantasies, which must perforce remain
unconscious on account of their content and their origin in repressed material. A more thorough examination of the character of these dayphantasies shows with what good reason the same name has been given to these formations as to the products of nocturnal thought - dreams. They
have essential features in common with nocturnal dreams; indeed, the investigation of day-dreams might really have afforded the shortest and
best approach to the understanding of nocturnal dreams.
Like dreams, they are wish-fulfilments; like dreams, they are largely based upon the impressions of childish experiences; like dreams, they obtain
a certain indulgence from the censorship in respect of their creations. If we trace their formation, we become aware how the wish-motive which
has been operative in their production has taken the material of which they are built, mixed it together, rearranged it, and fitted it together into a
new whole. They bear very much the same relation to the childish memories to which they refer as many of the baroque palaces of Rome bear to
the ancient ruins, whose hewn stones and columns have furnished the material for the structures built in the modern style.
In the secondary elaboration of the dream-content which we have ascribed to our fourth dream-forming factor, we find once more the very same
activity which is allowed to manifest itself, uninhibited by other influences, in the creation of day-dreams. We may say, without further
preliminaries, that this fourth factor of ours seeks to construct something like a day-dream from the material which offers itself. But where such a
day-dream has already been constructed in the context of the dream-thoughts, this factor of the dream-work will prefer to take possession of it,
and contrive that it gets into the dream-content. There are dreams that consist merely of the repetition of a day-phantasy, which has perhaps
remained unconscious - as, for instance, the boy's dream that he is riding in a war-chariot with the heroes of the Trojan war. In my Autodidasker
dream the second part of the dream at least is the faithful repetition of a day-phantasy - harmless in itself - of my dealings with Professor N. The
fact that the exciting phantasy forms only a part of the dream, or that only a part of it finds its way into the dream-content, is due to the
complexity of the conditions which the dream must satisfy at its genesis. On the whole, the phantasy is treated like any other component of the
latent material; but it is often still recognizable as a whole in the dream. In my dreams there are often parts which are brought into prominence by
their producing a different impression from that produced by the other parts. They seem to me to be in a state of flux, to be more coherent and at
the same time more transient than other portions of the same dream. I know that these are unconscious phantasies which find their way into the
context of the dream, but I have never yet succeeded in registering such a phantasy. For the rest, these phantasies, like all the other component
parts of the dream-thoughts, are jumbled together, condensed, superimposed, and so on; but we find all the transitional stages, from the case in
which they may constitute the dream-content, or at least the dream-facade, unaltered, to the most contrary case, in which they are represented in
the dream-content by only one of their elements, or by a remote allusion to such an element. The fate of the phantasies in the dream-thoughts is
obviously determined by the advantages they can offer as against the claims of the censorship and the pressure of condensation.
In my choice of examples for dream-interpretation I have, as far as possible, avoided those dreams in which unconscious phantasies play a
considerable part, because the introduction of this psychic element would have necessitated an extensive discussion of the psychology of
unconscious thought. But even in this connection I cannot entirely avoid the phantasy, because it often finds its way into the dream complete, and
still more often perceptibly glimmers through it. I might mention yet one more dream, which seems to be composed of two distinct and opposed
phantasies, overlapping here and there, of which the first is superficial, while the second becomes, as it were, the interpretation of the first.[103]
The dream - it is the only one of which I possess no careful notes - is roughly to this effect: The dreamer - a young unmarried man - is sitting in
his favourite inn, which is seen correctly; several persons come to fetch him, among them someone who wants to arrest him. He says to his table
companions, "I will pay later, I am coming back." But they cry, smiling scornfully: "We know all about that; that's what everybody says." One
guest calls after him: "There goes another one." He is then led to a small place where he finds a woman with a child in her arms. One of his
escorts says: "This is Herr Muller." A commissioner or some other official is running through a bundle of tickets or papers, repeating Muller,
Muller, Muller. At last the commissioner asks him a question, which he answers with a "Yes." He then takes a look at the woman, and notices that
she has grown a large beard.
The two component parts are here easily separable. What is superficial is the phantasy of being arrested; this seems to be newly created by the
dream-work. But behind it the phantasy of marriage is visible, and this material, on the other hand, has been slightly modified by the dream-work,
and the features which may be common to the two phantasies appear with special distinctness, as in Galton's composite photographs. The promise
of the young man, who is at present a bachelor, to return to his place at his accustomed table - the scepticism of his drinking companions, made
wise by their many experiences - their calling after him: "There goes (marries) another one" - are all features easily susceptible of the other
interpretation, as is the affirmative answer given to the official. Running through a bundle of papers and repeating the same name corresponds to
a subordinate but easily recognized feature of the marriage ceremony - the reading aloud of the congratulatory telegrams which have arrived at
irregular intervals, and which, of course, are all addressed to the same name. In the personal appearance of the bride in this dream the marriage
phantasy has even got the better of the arrest phantasy which screens it. The fact that this bride finally wears a beard I can explain from
information received - I had no opportunity of making an analysis. The dreamer had, on the previous day, been crossing the street with a friend
who was just as hostile to marriage as himself, and had called his friend's attention to a beautiful brunette who was coming towards them. The
friend had remarked: "Yes, if only these women wouldn't get beards as they grow older, like their fathers."
Of course, even in this dream there is no lack of elements with which the dream-distortion has done deep work. Thus, the speech, "I will pay
later," may have reference to the behaviour feared on the part of the father-in-law in the matter of a dowry. Obviously all sorts of misgivings are 
preventing the dreamer from surrendering himself with pleasure to the phantasy of marriage. One of these misgivings - at with marriage he might
lose his freedom - has embodied itself in the transformation of a scene of arrest.
If we once more return to the thesis that the dream-work prefers to make use of a ready-made phantasy, instead of first creating one from the
material of the dream-thoughts, we shall perhaps be able to solve one of the most interesting problems of the dream. I have related the dream of
Maury, who is struck on the back of the neck by a small board, and wakes after a long dream - a complete romance of the period of the French
Revolution. Since the dream is produced in a coherent form, and completely fits the explanation of the waking stimulus, of whose occurrence the
sleeper could have had no forboding, only one assumption seems possible, namely, that the whole richly elaborated dream must have been
composed and dreamed in the short interval of time between the falling of the board on cervical vertebrae and the waking induced by the blow.
We should not venture to ascribe such rapidity to the mental operations of the waking state, so that we have to admit that the dream-work has the
privilege of a remarkable acceleration of its issue.
To this conclusion, which rapidly became popular, more recent authors (Le Lorrain, Egger, and others) have opposed emphatic objections; some
of them doubt the correctness of Maury's record of the dream, some seek to show that the rapidity of our mental operations in waking life is by no
means inferior to that which we can, without reservation, ascribe to the mental operations in dreams. The discussion raises fundamental questions,
which I do not think are at all near solution. But I must confess that Egger's objections, for example, to Maury's dream of the guillotine, do not
impress me as convincing. I would suggest the following explanation of this dream: Is it so very improbable that Maury's dream may have
represented a phantasy which had been preserved for years in his memory, in a completed state, and which was awakened - I should like to say,
alluded to - at the moment when he became aware of the waking stimulus? The whole difficulty of composing so long a story, with all its details,
in the exceedingly short space of time which is here at the dreamer's disposal then disappears; the story was already composed. If the board had
struck Maury's neck when he was awake, there would perhaps have been time for the thought: "Why, that's just like being guillotined." But as he
is struck by the board while asleep, the dream-work quickly utilizes the incoming stimulus for the construction of a wish-fulfilment, as if it
thought (this is to be taken quite figuratively): "Here is a good opportunity to realize the wish-phantasy which I formed at such and such a time
while I was reading." It seems to me undeniable that this dream-romance is just such a one as a young man is wont to construct under the
influence of exciting impressions. Who has not been fascinated - above all, a Frenchman and a student of the history of civilization - by
descriptions of the Reign of Terror, in which the aristocracy, men and women, the flower of the nation, showed that it was possible to die with a
light heart, and preserved their ready wit and the refinement of their manners up to the moment of the last fateful summons? How tempting to
fancy oneself in the midst of all this, as one of these young men who take leave of their ladies with a kiss of the hand, and fearlessly ascend the
scaffold! Or perhaps ambition was the ruling motive of the phantasy - the ambition to put oneself in the place of one of those powerful
personalities who, by their sheer force of intellect and their fiery eloquence, ruled the city in which the heart of mankind was then beating so
convulsively; who were impelled by their convictions to send thousands of human beings to their death, and were paving the way for the
transformation of Europe; who, in the meantime, were not sure of their own heads, and might one day lay them under the knife of the guillotine,
perhaps in the role of a Girondist or the hero Danton? The detail preserved in the memory of the dream, accompanied by an enormous crowd,
seems to show that Maury's phantasy was an ambitious one of just this character.
But the phantasy prepared so long ago need not be experienced again in sleep; it is enough that it should be, so to speak, "touched off." What I
mean is this: If a few notes are struck, and someone says, as in Don Juan: "That is from The Marriage of Figaro by Mozart," memories suddenly
surge up within me, none of which I can recall to consciousness a moment later. The phrase serves as a point of irruption from which a complete
whole is simultaneously put into a condition of stimulation. It may well be the same in unconscious thinking. Through the waking stimulus the
psychic station is excited which gives access to the whole guillotine phantasy. This phantasy, however, is not run through in sleep, but only in the
memory of the awakened sleeper. Upon waking, the sleeper remembers in detail the phantasy which was transferred as a whole into the dream. At
the same time, he has no means of assuring himself that he is really remembering something which was dreamed. The same explanation - namely,
that one is dealing with finished phantasies which have been evoked as wholes by the waking stimulus - may be applied to other dreams which
are adapted to the waking stimulus - for example, to Napoleon's dream of a battle before the explosion of a bomb. Among the dreams collected by
Justine Tobowolska in her dissertation on the apparent duration of time in dreams,[104] I think the most corroborative is that related by Macario
(1857) as having been dreamed by a playwright, Casimir Bonjour. Bonjour intended one evening to witness the first performance of one of his
own plays, but he was so tired that he dozed off in his chair behind the scenes just as the curtain was rising. In his sleep he went through all the
five acts of his play, and observed all the various signs of emotion which were manifested by the audience during each individual scene. At the
close of the performance, to his great satisfaction, he heard his name called out amidst the most lively manifestations of applause. Suddenly he
woke. He could hardly believe his eyes or his ears; the performance had not gone beyond the first lines of the first scene; he could not have been
asleep for more than two minutes. As for the dream, the running through the five acts of the play and the observing the attitude of the public
towards each individual scene need not, we may venture to assert, have been something new, produced while the dreamer was asleep; it may have
been a repetition of an already completed work of the phantasy. Tobowolska and other authors have emphasized a common characteristic of
dreams that show an accelerated flow of ideas: namely, that they seem to be especially coherent, and not at all like other dreams, and that the
dreamer's memory of them is summary rather than detailed. But these are precisely the characteristics which would necessarily be exhibited by
ready-made phantasies touched off by the dream-work - a conclusion which is not, of course, drawn by these authors. I do not mean to assert that
all dreams due to a waking stimulus admit of this explanation, or that the problem of the accelerated flux of ideas in dreams is entirely disposed of
in this manner.
And here we are forced to consider the relation of this secondary elaboration of the dream-content to the other factors of the dream-work. May not 
the procedure perhaps be as follows? The dream-forming factors, the efforts at condensation, the necessity of evading the censorship, and the
regard for representability by the psychic means of the dream first of all create from the dream-material a provisional dream-content, which is
subsequently modified until it satisfies as far as possible the exactions of a secondary agency. No, this is hardly probable. We must rather assume
that the requirements of this agency constitute from the very first one of the conditions which the dream must satisfy, and that this condition, as
well as the conditions of condensation, the opposing censorship, and representability, simultaneously influence, in an inductive and selective
manner, the whole mass of material in the dream-thoughts. But of the four conditions necessary for dream-formation, the last recognized is that
whose exactions appear to be least binding upon the dream. The following consideration makes it seem very probable that this psychic function,
which undertakes the so-called secondary elaboration of the dream-content, is identical with the work of our waking thought: Our waking
(preconscious) thought behaves towards any given perceptual material precisely as the function in question behaves towards the dream-content. It
is natural to our waking thought to create order in such material, to construct relations, and to subject it to the requirements of an intelligible
coherence. Indeed, we go rather too far in this respect; the tricks of conjurers befool us by taking advantage of this intellectual habit of ours. In the
effort to combine in an intelligible manner the sensory impressions which present themselves we often commit the most curious mistakes, and
even distort the truth of the material before us. The proofs of this fact are so familiar that we need not give them further consideration here. We
overlook errors which make nonsense of a printed page because we imagine the proper words. The editor of a widely read French journal is said
to have made a bet that he could print the words from in front or from behind in every sentence of a long article without any of his readers
noticing it. He won his bet. Years ago I came across a comical example of false association in a newspaper. After the session of the French
Chamber in which Dupuy quelled the panic, caused by the explosion of a bomb thrown by an anarchist, with the courageous words, "La seance
continue,"[105] the visitors in the gallery were asked to testify as to their impressions of the outrage. Among them were two provincials. One of
these said that immediately after the end of a speech he had heard a detonation, but that he had thought that it was the parliamentary custom to
fire a shot whenever a speaker had finished. The other, who had apparently already listened to several speakers, had got hold of the same idea, but
with this variation, that he supposed the shooting to be a sign of appreciation following a specially successful speech.
Thus, the psychic agency which approaches the dream-content with the demand that it must be intelligible, which subjects it to a first
interpretation, and in doing so leads to the complete misunderstanding of it, is none other than our normal thought. In our interpretation the rule
will be, in every case, to disregard the apparent coherence of the dream as being of suspicious origin and, whether the elements are confused or
clear, to follow the same regressive path to the dream-material.
At the same time, we note those factors upon which the above-mentioned (chapter VI., C) scale of quality in dreams - from confusion to clearness
- is essentially independent. Those parts of the dream seem to us clear in which the secondary elaboration has been able to accomplish something;
those seem confused where the powers of this performance have failed. Since the confused parts of the dream are often likewise those which are
less vividly presented, we may conclude that the secondary dream-work is responsible also for a contribution to the plastic intensity of the
individual dream-structures.
If I seek an object of comparison for the definitive formation of the dream, as it manifests itself with the assistance of normal thinking, I can think
of none better than those mysterious inscriptions with which Die Fliegende Blatter has so long amused its readers. In a certain sentence which, for
the sake of contrast, is in dialect, and whose significance is as scurrilous as possible, the reader is led to expect a Latin inscription. For this
purpose the letters of the words are taken out of their syllabic groupings, and are rearranged. Here and there a genuine Latin word results; at otherpoints, on the assumption that letters have been obliterated by weathering, or omitted, we allow ourselves to be deluded about the significance of
certain isolated and meaningless letters. If we do not wish to be fooled we must give up looking for an inscription, must take the letters as they
stand, and combine them, disregarding their arrangement, into words of our mother tongue.
The secondary elaboration is that factor of the dream-work which has been observed by most of the writers on dreams, and whose importance has
been duly appreciated. Havelock Ellis gives an amusing allegorical description of its performances: "As a matter of fact, we might even imagine
the sleeping consciousness as saying to itself: 'Here comes our master, Waking Consciousness, who attaches such mighty importance to reason
and logic and so forth. Quick! gather things up, put them in order - any order will do - before he enters to take possession.'"[106]
The identity of this mode of operation with that of waking thought is very clearly stated by Delacroix in his Sur la structure logique du reve (p.
526): "Cette fonction d'interpretation n'est pas particuliere au reve; c'est le meme travail de coordination logique que nous faisons sur nos
sensations pendant la veille."[107]
J. Sully is of the same opinion; and so is Tobowolska: "Sur ces successions incoherentes d'hallucinations, l'esprit s'efforce de faire le meme travail
de coordination logique qu'il fait pendant le veille sur les sensations. Il relie entre elles par un lien imaginaire toutes ces images decousues et
bouche les ecarts trop grands qui se trouvaient entre elles"[108] (p. 93).
Some authors maintain that this ordering and interpreting activity begins even in the dream and is continued in the waking state. Thus Paulhan (p.
547): "Cependant j'ai souvent pense qu'il pouvait y avoir une certain deformation, ou plutot reformation du reve dans le souvenir.... La tendence
systematisante de l'imagination pourrait fort bien achever apres le reveil ce qu'elle a ebauche pendant le sommeil. De la sorte, la rapidite reelle de
la pensee serait augmentee en apparence par les perfectionnements dus a l'imagination eveillee."[109]
Leroy and Tobowolska (p. 502): "Dans le reve, au contraire, l'interpretation et la coordination se font non seulement a l'aide des donnees du reve,
mais encore a l'aide de celles de la veille...."[110]
It was therefore inevitable that this one recognized factor of dream-formation should be over-estimated, so that the whole process of creating the
dream was attributed to it. This creative work was supposed to be accomplished at the moment of waking, as was assumed by Goblot, and with
deeper conviction by Foucault, who attributed to waking thought the faculty of creating the dream out of the thoughts which emerged in sleep.
In respect to this conception, Leroy and Tobowolska express themselves as follows: "On a cru pouvoir placer le reve au moment du reveil et ils
ont attribue a la pensee de la veille la fonction de construire le reve avec les images presentes dans la pensee du sommeil."[111]
To this estimate of the secondary elaboration I will add the one fresh contribution to the dream-work which has been indicated by the sensitive
observations of H. Silberer. Silberer has caught the transformation of thoughts into images in flagranti, by forcing himself to accomplish
intellectual work while in a state of fatigue and somnolence. The elaborated thought vanished, and in its place there appeared a vision which
proved to be a substitute for - usually abstract - thoughts. In these experiments it so happened that the emerging image, which may be regarded as
a dream-element, represented something other than the thoughts which were waiting for elaboration: namely, the exhaustion itself, the difficulty
or distress involved in this work; that is, the subjective state and the manner of functioning of the person exerting himself rather than the object of
his exertions. Silberer called this case, which in him occurred quite often, the functional phenomenon, in contradistinction to the material
phenomenon which he expected.
"For example: one afternoon I am lying, extremely sleepy, on my sofa, but I nevertheless force myself to consider a philosophical problem. I
endeavour to compare the views of Kant and Schopenhauer concerning time. Owing to my somnolence I do not succeed in holding on to both
trains of thought, which would have been necessary for the purposes of comparison. After several vain efforts, I once more exert all my willpower to formulate for myself the Kantian deduction in order to apply it to Schopenhauer's statement of the problem. Thereupon, I directed my
attention to the latter, but when I tried to return to Kant, I found that he had again escaped me, and I tried in vain to fetch him back. And now this
fruitless endeavour to rediscover the Kantian documents mislaid somewhere in my head suddenly presented itself, my eyes being closed, as in a
dream-image, in the form of a visible, plastic symbol: I demand information of a grumpy secretary, who, bent over a desk, does not allow my
urgency to disturb him; half straightening himself, he gives me a look of angry refusal."[112]
Other examples, which relate to the fluctuation between sleep and waking:
"Example No. 2. Conditions: Morning, while awaking. While to a certain extent asleep (crepuscular state), thinking over a previous dream, in a
way repeating and finishing it, I feel myself drawing nearer to the waking state, yet I wish to remain in the crepuscular state...'Scene: I am
stepping with one foot over a stream, but I at once pull it back again and resolve to remain on this side.'[113]
"Example No. 6. Conditions the same as in Example No. 4 (he wishes to remain in bed a little longer without oversleeping). I wish to indulge in a
little longer sleep. .."Scene: I am saying good-bye to somebody, and I agree to meet him (or her) again before long."
I will now proceed to summarize this long disquisition on the dream-work. We were confronted by the question whether in dream-formation the
psyche exerts all its faculties to their full extent, without inhibition, or only a fraction of them, which are restricted in their action. Our
investigations lead us to reject such a statement of the problem as wholly inadequate in the circumstances. But if, in our answer, we are to remain
on the ground upon which the question forces us, we must assent to two conceptions which are apparently opposed and mutually exclusive. The
psychic activity in dream-formation resolves itself into two achievements: the production of the dream-thoughts and the transformation of these
into the dream-content. The dream-thoughts are perfectly accurate, and are formed with all the psychic profusion of which we are capable; they
belong to the thoughts which have not become conscious, from which our conscious thoughts also result by means of a certain transposition.
There is doubtless much in them that is worth knowing, and also mysterious, but these problems have no particular relation to our dreams, and
cannot claim to be treated under the head of dream-problems.[114] On the other hand, we have the process which changes the unconscious
thoughts into the dream-content, which is peculiar to the dream-life and characteristic of it. Now, this peculiar dream-work is much farther
removed from the pattern of waking thought than has been supposed by even the most decided depreciators of the psychic activity in dreamformation. It is not so much that it is more negligent, more incorrect, more forgetful, more incomplete than waking thought; it is something
altogether different, qualitatively, from waking thought, and cannot therefore be compared with it. It does not think, calculate, or judge at all, but
limits itself to the work of transformation. It may be exhaustively described if we do not lose sight of the conditions which its product must
satisfy. This product, the dream, has above all to be withdrawn from the censorship, and to this end the dream-work makes use of the
displacement of psychic intensities, even to the transvaluation of all psychic values; thoughts must be exclusively or predominantly reproduced in
the material of visual and acoustic memory-traces, and from this requirement there proceeds the regard of the dream-work for representability,
which it satisfies by fresh displacements. Greater intensities have (probably) to be produced than are at the disposal of the night dream-thoughts,
and this purpose is served by the extensive condensation to which the constituents of the dream-thoughts are subjected. Little attention is paid to
the logical relations of the thought-material; they ultimately find a veiled representation in the formal peculiarities of the dream. The affects of the
dream-thoughts undergo slighter alterations than their conceptual content. As a rule, they are suppressed; where they are preserved, they are freed
from the concepts and combined in accordance with their similarity. Only one part of the dream-work - the revision, variable in amount, which is 
effected by the partially wakened conscious thought - is at all consistent with the conception which the writers on the subject have endeavoured to
extend to the whole performance of dream-formation. 

Among the dreams which have been communicated to me by others, there is one which is at this point especially worthy of our attention. It was
told me by a female patient who had heard it related in a lecture on dreams. Its original source is unknown to me. This dream evidently made a
deep impression upon the lady, since she went so far as to imitate it, i.e., to repeat the elements of this dream in a dream of her own; in order, by
this transference, to express her agreement with a certain point in the dream.
The preliminary conditions of this typical dream were as follows: A father had been watching day and night beside the sick-bed of his child. After
the child died, he retired to rest in an adjoining room, but left the door ajar so that he could look from his room into the next, where the child's
body lay surrounded by tall candles. An old man, who had been installed as a watcher, sat beside the body, murmuring prayers. After sleeping for
a few hours the father dreamed that the child was standing by his bed, clasping his arm and crying reproachfully: "7father, don't you see that I am
burning?" The father woke up and noticed a bright light coming from the adjoining room. Rushing in, he found that the old man had fallen asleep,
and the sheets and one arm of the beloved body were burnt by a fallen candle.
The meaning of this affecting dream is simple enough, and the explanation given by the lecturer, as my patient reported it, was correct. The bright
light shining through the open door on to the sleeper's eyes gave him the impression which he would have received had he been awake: namely,
that a fire had been started near the corpse by a falling candle. It is quite possible that he had taken into his sleep his anxiety lest the aged watcher
should not be equal to his task.
We can find nothing to change in this interpretation; we can only add that the content of the dream must be overdetermined, and that the speech 
of the child must have consisted of phrases which it had uttered while still alive, and which were associated with important events for the father.
Perhaps the complaint, "I am burning," was associated with the fever from which the child died, and "7father, don't you see?" to some other
affective occurrence unknown to us.
Now, when we have come to recognize that the dream has meaning, and can be fitted into the context of psychic events, it may be surprising that
a dream should have occurred in circumstances which called for such an immediate waking. We shall then note that even this dream is not
lacking in a wish-fulfilment. The dead child behaves as though alive; he warns his father himself; he comes to his father's bed and clasps his arm,
as he probably did in the recollection from which the dream obtained the first part of the child's speech. It was for the sake of this wish-fulfilment
that the father slept a moment longer. The dream was given precedence over waking reflection because it was able to show the child still living. If
the father had waked first, and had then drawn the conclusion which led him into the adjoining room, he would have shortened the child's life by
this one moment.
There can be no doubt about the peculiar features in this brief dream which engage our particular interest. So far, we have endeavoured mainly to
ascertain wherein the secret meaning of the dream consists, how it is to be discovered, and what means the dream-work uses to conceal it. In other
words, our greatest interest has hitherto been centered on the problems of interpretation. Now, however, we encounter a dream which is easily
explained, and the meaning of which is without disguise; we note that nevertheless this dream preserves the essential characteristics which
conspicuously differentiate a dream from our waking thoughts, and this difference demands an explanation. It is only when we have disposed of
all the problems of interpretation that we feel how incomplete is our psychology of dreams.
But before we turn our attention to this new path of investigation, let us stop and look back, and consider whether we have not overlooked
something important on our way hither. For we must understand that the easy and comfortable part of our journey lies behind us. Hitherto, all the
paths that we have followed have led, if I mistake not, to light, to explanation, and to full understanding; but from the moment when we seek to
penetrate more deeply into the psychic processes in dreaming, all paths lead into darkness. It is quite impossible to explain the dream as a psychic
process, for to explain means to trace back to the known, and as yet we have no psychological knowledge to which we can refer such explanatory
fundamentals as may be inferred from the psychological investigation of dreams. On the contrary, we shall be compelled to advance a number of
new assumptions, which do little more than conjecture the structure of the psychic apparatus and the play of the energies active in it; and we shall
have to be careful not to go too far beyond the simplest logical construction, since otherwise its value will be doubtful. And even if we should be
unerring in our inferences, and take cognizance of all the logical possibilities, we should still be in danger of arriving at a completely mistaken
result, owing to the probable incompleteness of the preliminary statement of our elementary data. We shall not he able to arrive at any
conclusions as to the structure and function of the psychic instrument from even the most careful investigation of dreams, or of any other isolated
activity; or, at all events, we shall not be able to confirm our conclusions. To do this we shall have to collate such phenomena as the comparative
study of a whole series of psychic activities proves to be reliably constant. So that the psychological assumptions which we base on the analysis
of the dream-processes will have to mark time, as it were, until they can join up with the results of other investigations which, proceeding from
another starting-point, will seek to penetrate to the heart of the same problem. 

I propose, then, that we shall first of all turn our attention to a subject which brings us to a hitherto disregarded objection, which threatens to
undermine the very foundation of our efforts at dream-interpretation. The objection has been made from more than one quarter that the dream
which we wish to interpret is really unknown to us, or, to be more precise, that we have no guarantee that we know it as it really occurred.
What we recollect of the dream, and what we subject to our methods of interpretation, is, in the first place, mutilated by the unfaithfulness of our
memory, which seems quite peculiarly incapable of retaining dreams, and which may have omitted precisely the most significant parts of their
content. For when we try to consider our dreams attentively, we often have reason to complain that we have dreamed much than we remember;
that unfortunately we know nothing more than this one fragment, and that our recollection of even this fragment seems to us strangely uncertain.
Moreover, everything goes to prove that our memory reproduces the dream not only incompletely but also untruthfully, in a falsifying manner.
As, on the one hand, we may doubt whether what we dreamed was really as disconnected as it is in our recollections, so on the other hand we
may doubt whether a dream was really as coherent as our account of it; whether in our attempted reproduction we have not filled in the gaps
which really existed, or those which are due to forgetfulness, with new and arbitrarily chosen material; whether we have not embellished the
dream, rounded it off and corrected it, so that any conclusion as to its real content becomes impossible. Indeed, one writer (Spitta)[1] surmises
that all that is orderly and coherent is really first put into the dream during the attempt to recall it. Thus we are in danger of being deprived of the
very object whose value we have undertaken to determine.
In all our dream-interpretations we have hitherto ignored these warnings. On the contrary, indeed, we have found that the smallest, most
insignificant, and most uncertain components of the dream-content invited interpretations no less emphatically than those which were distinctly
and certainly contained in the dream. In the dream of Irma's injection we read: "I quickly called in Dr. M," and we assumed that even this small
addendum would not have got into the dream if it had not been susceptible of a special derivation. In this way we arrived at the history of that
unfortunate patient to whose bedside I quickly called my older colleague. In the seemingly absurd dream which treated the difference between
fifty-one and fifty-six as a quantity negligible the number fifty-one was mentioned repeatedly. Instead of regarding this as a matter of course, or a 
detail of indifferent value, we proceeded from this to a second train of thought in the latent dream-content, which led to the number fifty-one, and
by following up this clue we arrived at the fears which proposed fifty-one years as the term of life in the sharpest opposition to a dominant train
of thought which was boastfully lavish of the years. In the dream Non vixit I found, as an insignificant interpolation, that I had at first overlooked
the sentence: As P does not understand him, Fl asks me, etc. The interpretation then coming to a standstill, I went back to these words, and I
found through them the way to the infantile phantasy which appeared in the dream-thoughts as an intermediate point of junction. This came about
by means of the poet's verses:
Selten habt ihr mich verstanden,
Selten auch verstand ich Euch,
Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden
So verstanden wir uns gleich![2]
Every analysis will afford evidence of the fact that the most insignificant features of the dream are indispensable to interpretation, and will show
how the completion of the task is delayed if we postpone our examination of them. We have given equal attention, in the interpretation of dreams,
to every nuance of verbal expression found in them; indeed, whenever we are confronted by a senseless or insufficient wording, as though we had
failed to translate the dream into the proper version, we have respected even these defects of expression. In brief, what other writers have
regarded as arbitrary improvisations, concocted hastily to avoid confusion, we have treated like a sacred text. This contradiction calls for
explanation.
It would appear, without doing any injustice to the writers in question, that the explanation is in our favour. From the standpoint of our newlyacquired insight into the origin of dreams, all contradictions are completely reconciled. It is true that we distort the dream in our attempt to
reproduce it; we once more find therein what we have called the secondary and often misunderstanding elaboration of the dream by the agency of
normal thinking. But this distortion is itself no more than a part of the elaboration to which the dream-thoughts are constantly subjected as a result
of the dream-censorship. Other writers have here suspected or observed that part of the dream-distortion whose work is manifest; but for us this is
of little consequence, as we know that a far more extensive work of distortion, not so easily apprehended, has already taken the dream for its
object from among the hidden dream-thoughts. The only mistake of these writers consists in believing the modification effected in the dream by
its recollection and verbal expression to be arbitrary, incapable of further solution, and consequently liable to lead us astray in our cognition of thedream. They underestimate the determination of the dream in the psyche. Here there is nothing arbitrary. It can be shown that in all cases a second
train of thought immediately takes over the determination of the elements which have been left undetermined by the first. For example, I wish
quite arbitrarily to think of a number; but this is not possible; the number that occurs to me is definitely and necessarily determined by thoughts
within me which may be quite foreign to my momentary purpose. [3] The modifications which the dream undergoes in its revision by the waking
mind are just as little arbitrary. They preserve an associative connection with the content, whose place they take, and serve to show us the way to
this content, which may itself be a substitute for yet another content.
In analysing the dreams of patients I impose the following test of this assertion, and never without success. If the first report of a dream seems not
very comprehensible, I request the dreamer to repeat it. This he rarely does in the same words. But the passages in which the expression is
modified are thereby made known to me as the weak points of the dream's disguise; they are what the embroidered emblem on Siegfried's raiment
was to Hagen. These are the points from which the analysis may start. The narrator has been admonished by my announcement that I intend to
take special pains to solve the dream, and immediately, obedient to the urge of resistance, he protects the weak points of the dream's disguise,
replacing a treacherous expression by a less relevant one. He thus calls my attention to the expressions which he has discarded. From the efforts
made to guard against the solution of the dream, I can also draw conclusions about the care with which the raiment of the dream has been woven.
The writers whom I have mentioned are, however, less justified when they attribute so much importance to the doubt with which our judgment
approaches the relation of the dream. For this doubt is not intellectually warranted; our memory can give no guarantees, but nevertheless we are
compelled to credit its statements far more frequently than is objectively justifiable. Doubt concerning the accurate reproduction of the dream, or
of individual data of the dream, is only another offshoot of the dream-censorship, that is, of resistance to the emergence of the dream-thoughts
into consciousness. This resistance has not yet exhausted itself by the displacements and substitutions which it has effected, so that it still clings,
in the form of doubt, to what has been allowed to emerge. We can recognize this doubt all the more readily in that it is careful never to attack the
intensive elements of the dream, but only the weak and indistinct ones. But we already know that a transvaluation of all the psychic values has
taken place between the dream-thoughts and the dream. The distortion has been made possible only by devaluation; it constantly manifests itself
in this way and sometimes contents itself therewith. If doubt is added to the indistinctness of an element of the dream-content, we may, following
this indication, recognize in this element a direct offshoot of one of the outlawed dream-thoughts. The state of affairs is like that obtaining after a
great revolution in one of the republics of antiquity or the Renaissance. The once powerful, ruling families of the nobility are now banished; all
high posts are filled by upstarts; in the city itself only the poorer and most powerless citizens, or the remoter followers of the vanquished party,
are tolerated. Even the latter do not enjoy the full rights of citizenship. They are watched with suspicion. In our case, instead of suspicion we have
doubt. I must insist, therefore, that in the analysis of a dream one must emancipate oneself from the whole scale of standards of reliability; and if
there is the slightest possibility that this or that may have occurred in the dream, it should be treated as an absolute certainty. Until one has
decided to reject all respect for appearances in tracing the dream-elements, the analysis will remain at a standstill. Disregard of the element
concerned has the psychic effect, in the person analysed, that nothing in connection with the unwished ideas behind this element will occur to
him. This effect is really not self-evident; it would be quite reasonable to say, "Whether this or that was contained in the dream I do not know for 
certain; but the following ideas happen to occur to me." But no one ever does say so; it is precisely the disturbing effect of doubt in the analysis
that permits it to be unmasked as an offshoot and instrument of the psychic resistance. Psycho-analysis is justifiably suspicions. One of its rules
runs: Whatever disturbs the progress of the work is a resistance. [4] -
The forgetting of dreams, too, remains inexplicible until we seek to explain it by the power of the psychic censorship. The feeling that one has
dreamed a great deal during the night and has retained only a little of it may have yet another meaning in a number of cases: it may perhaps mean
that the dream-work has continued in a perceptible manner throughout the night, but has left behind it only one brief dream. There is, however, no
possible doubt that a dream is progressively forgotten on waking. One often forgets it in spite of a painful effort to recover it. I believe, however,
that just as one generally overestimates the extent of this forgetting, so also one overestimates the lacunae in our knowledge of the dream due to
the gaps occurring in it. All the dream-content that has been lost by forgetting can often be recovered by analysis; in a number of cases, at all
events, it is possible to discover from a single remaining fragment, not the dream, of course - which, after all, is of no importance - but the whole
of the dream-thoughts. It requires a greater expenditure of attention and self-suppression in the analysis; that is all; but it shows that the forgetting
of the dream is not innocent of hostile intention.[5]
A convincing proof of the tendencious nature of dream-forgetting - of the fact that it serves the resistance - is obtained on analysis by
investigating a preliminary stage of forgetting.[6] It often happens that, in the midst of an interpretation, an omitted fragment of the dream
suddenly emerges which is described as having been previously forgotten. This part of the dream that has been wrested from forgetfulness is
always the most important part. It lies on the shortest path to the solution of the dream, and for that every reason it was most exposed to the
resistance. Among the examples of dreams that I have included in the text of this treatise, it once happened that I had subsequently to interpolate a
fragment of dream-content. The dream is a dream of travel, which revenges itself on two unamiable traveling companions; I have left it almost
entirely uninterpreted, as part of its content is obscene. The part omitted reads: "I said, referring to a book of Schiller's: 'It is from...' but corrected
myself, as I realized my mistake: 'It is by...' Whereupon the man remarked to his sister, 'Yes, he said it correctly.'"[7]
Self-correction in dreams, which to some writers seems so wonderful, does not really call for consideration. But I will draw from my own
memory an instance typical of verbal errors in dreams. I was nineteen years of age when I visited England for the first time, and I spent a day on
the shore of the Irish Sea. Naturally enough, I amused myself by picking up the marine animals left on the beach by the tide, and I was just
examining a starfish (the dream begins with Hollthurn - Holothurian) when a pretty little girl came up to me and asked me: "Is it a starfish? Is it
alive?" I replied, "Yes, he is alive," but then felt ashamed of my mistake, and repeated the sentence correctly. For the grammatical mistake which
I then made, the dream substitutes another which is quite common among German people. "Das Buch ist von Schiller" is not to be translated by
"the book is from," but by "the book is by." That the dream-work accomplishes this substitution, because the word from, owing to its consonance
with the German adjective fromm (pious, devout) makes a remarkable condensation possible, should no longer surprise us after all that we have
heard of the intentions of the dream-work and its unscrupulous selection of means. But what relation has this harmless recollection of the
seashore to my dream? It explains, by means of a very innocent example, that I have used the word - the word denoting gender, or sex or the
sexual (he) - in the wrong place. This is surely one of the keys to the solution of the dream. Those who have heard of the derivation of the booktitle Matter and Motion (Moliere in Le Malade Imaginaire: La Matiere est-elle laudable? - A Motion of the bowels) will readily be able to supply
the missing parts.
Moreover, I can prove conclusively, by a demonstratio ad oculos, that the forgetting of the dream is in a large measure the work of the resistance.
A patient tells me that he has dreamed, but that the dream has vanished without leaving a trace, as if nothing had happened. We set to work,
however; I come upon a resistance which I explain to the patient; encouraging and urging him, I help him to become reconciled to some
disagreeable thought; and I have hardly succeeded in doing so when he exclaims: "Now I can recall what I dreamed!" The same resistance which
that day disturbed him in the work of interpretation caused him also to forget the dream. By overcoming this resistance I have brought back the
dream to his memory.
In the same way the patient, having reached a certain part of the work, may recall a dream which occurred three, four, or more days ago, and
which has hitherto remained in oblivion.[8]
Psycho-analytical experience has furnished us with yet another proof of the fact that the forgetting of dreams depends far more on the resistance
than on the mutually alien character of the waking and sleeping states, as some writers have believed it to depend. It often happens to me, as well
as to other analysts, and to patients under treatment, that we are waked from sleep by a dream, as we say, and that immediately thereafter, while in
full possession of our mental faculties, we begin to interpret the dream. Often in such cases I have not rested until I have achieved a full
understanding of the dream, and yet it has happened that after waking I have forgotten the interpretation - work as completely as I have forgotten
the dream-content itself, though I have been aware that I have dreamed and that I had interpreted the dream. The dream has far more frequently
taken the result of the interpretation with it into forgetfulness than the intellectual faculty has succeeded in retaining the dream in the memory.
But between this work of interpretation and the waking thoughts there is not that psychic abyss by which other writers have sought to explain the
forgetting of dreams. When Morton Prince objects to my explanation of the forgetting of dreams on the ground that it is only a special case of the
amnesia of dissociated psychic states, and that the impossibility of applying my explanation of this special amnesia to other types of amnesia
makes it valueless even for its immediate purpose, he reminds the reader that in all his descriptions of such dissociated states he has never
attempted to discover the dynamic explanation underlying these phenomena. For had he done so, he would surely have discovered that repression 
(and the resistance produced thereby) is the cause not of these dissociations merely, but also of the amnesia of their psychic content.
That dreams are as little forgotten as other psychic acts, that even in their power of impressing themselves on the memory they may fairly be
compared with the other psychic performances, was proved to me by an experiment which I was able to make while preparing the manuscript of
this book. I had preserved in my notes a great many dreams of my own which, for one reason or another, I could not interpret, or, at the time of
dreaming them, could interpret only very imperfectly. In order to obtain material to illustrate my assertion, I attempted to interpret some of them a
year or two later. In this attempt I was invariably successful; indeed, I may say that the interpretation was effected more easily after all this time
than when the dreams were of recent occurrence. As a possible explanation of this fact, I would suggest that I had overcome many of the internal
resistances which had disturbed me at the time of dreaming. In such subsequent interpretations I have compared the old yield of dream-thoughts
with the present result, which has usually been more abundant, and I have invariably found the old dream-thoughts unaltered among the present
ones. However, I soon recovered from my surprise when I reflected that I had long been accustomed to interpret dreams of former years that had
occasionally been related to me by my patients as though they had been dreams of the night before; by the same method, and with the same
success. In the section on anxiety-dreams I shall include two examples of such delayed dream-interpretations. When I made this experiment for
the first time I expected, not unreasonably, that dreams would behave in this connection merely like neurotic symptoms. For when I treat a
psychoneurotic for instance, an hysterical patient, by psychoanalysis, I am compelled to find explanations for the first symptoms of the malady,
which have long since disappeared, as well as for those still existing symptoms which have brought the patient to me; and I find the former
problem easier to solve than the more exigent one of today. In the Studies in Hysteria,[9] published as early as 1895, I was able to give the
explanation of a first hysterical attack which the patient, a woman over forty years of age, had experienced in her fifteenth year.[10]
I will now make a few rather unsystematic remarks relating to the interpretations of dreams, which will perhaps serve as a guide to the reader who
wishes to test my assertions by the analysis of his own dreams.
He must not expect that it will be a simple and easy matter to interpret his own dreams. Even the observation of endoptic phenomena, and other
sensations which are commonly immune from attention, calls for practice, although this group of observations is not opposed by any psychic
motive. It is very much more difficult to get hold of the unwished ideas. He who seeks to do so must fulfil the requirements laid down in this
treatise, and while following the rules here given, he must endeavour to restrain all criticism, all preconceptions, and all affective or intellectual
bias in himself during the work of analysis. He must be ever mindful of the precept which Claude Bernard held up to the experimenter in the
physiological laboratory: "Travailler comme une bete" - that is, he must be as enduring as an animal, and also as disinterested in the results of his
work. He who will follow this advice will no longer find the task a difficult one. The interpretation of a dream cannot always be accomplished in
one session; after following up a chain of associations you will often feel that your working capacity is exhausted; the dream will not tell you
anything more that day; it is then best to break off, and to resume the work the following day. Another portion of the dream-content then solicits
your attention, and you thus obtain access to a fresh stratum of the dream-thoughts. One might call this the fractional interpretation of dreams.
It is most difficult to induce the beginner in dream-interpretation to recognize the fact that his task is not finished when he is in possession of a
complete interpretation of the dream which is both ingenious and coherent, and which gives particulars of all the elements of the dream-content.
Besides this, another interpretation, an over-interpretation of the same dream, one which has escaped him, may be possible. It is really not easy to
form an idea of the wealth of trains of unconscious thought striving for expression in our minds, or to credit the adroitness displayed by the dreamwork in killing - so to speak - seven flies at one stroke, like the journeyman tailor in the fairy-tale, by means of its ambiguous modes of
expression. The reader will constantly be inclined to reproach the author for a superfluous display of ingenuity, but anyone who has had personal
experience of dream-interpretation will know better than to do so.
On the other hand, I cannot accept the opinion, first expressed by H. Silberer, that every dream - or even that many dreams, and certain groups of
dreams - calls for two different interpretations, between which there is even supposed to be a fixed relation. One of these, which Silberer calls the
psycho-analytic interpretation, attributes to the dream any meaning you please, but in the main an infantile sexual one. The other, the more
important interpretation, which he calls the anagogic interpretation, reveals the more serious and often profound thoughts which the dream-work
has used as its material. Silberer does not prove this assertion by citing a number of dreams which he has analysed in these two directions. I am
obliged to object to this opinion on the ground that it is contrary to facts. The majority of dreams require no over-interpretation, and are especially
insusceptible of an anagogic interpretation. The influence of a tendency which seeks to veil the fundamental conditions of dream-formation and
divert our interest from its instinctual roots is as evident in Silberer's theory as in other theoretical efforts of the last few years. In a number of
cases I can confirm Silberer's assertions; but in these the analysis shows me that the dream-work was confronted with the task of transforming a
series of highly abstract thoughts, incapable of direct representation, from waking life into a dream. The dream-work attempted to accomplish this
task by seizing upon another thought-material which stood in loose and often allegorical relation to the abstract thoughts, and thereby diminished
the difficulty of representing them. The abstract interpretation of a dream originating in this manner will be given by the dreamer immediately,
but the correct interpretation of the substituted material can be obtained only by means of the familiar technique.
The question whether every dream can be interpreted is to be answered in the negative. One should not forget that in the work of interpretation
one is opposed by the psychic forces that are responsible for the distortion of the dream. Whether one can master the inner resistances by one's
intellectual interest, one's capacity for self-control, one's psychological knowledge, and one's experience in dream-interpretation depends on the
relative strength of the opposing forces. It is always possible to make some progress; one can at all events go far enough to become convinced
that a dream has meaning, and generally far enough to gain some idea of its meaning. It very often happens that a second dream enables us to 
confirm and continue the interpretation assumed for the first. A whole series of dreams, continuing for weeks or months, may have a common
basis, and should therefore be interpreted as a continuity. In dreams that follow one another, we often observe that one dream takes as its central
point something that is only alluded to in the periphery of the next dream, and conversely, so that even in their interpretations the two supplement
each other. That different dreams of the same night are always to be treated, in the work of interpretation, as a whole, I have already shown by
examples.
In the best interpreted dreams we often have to leave one passage in obscurity because we observe during the interpretation that we have here a
tangle of dream-thoughts which cannot be unravelled, and which furnishes no fresh contribution to the dream-content. This, then, is the keystone
of the dream, the point at which it ascends into the unknown. For the dream-thoughts which we encounter during the interpretation commonly
have no termination, but run in all directions into the net-like entanglement of our intellectual world. It is from some denser part of this fabric that
the dream-wish then arises, like the mushroom from its mycelium.
Let us now return to the facts of dream-forgetting. So far, of course, we have failed to draw any important conclusion from them. When our
waking life shows an unmistakable intention to forget the dream which has been formed during the night, either as a whole, immediately after
waking, or little by little in the course of the day, and when we recognize as the chief factor in this process of forgetting the psychic resistance
against the dream which has already done its best to oppose the dream at night, the question then arises: What actually has made the dreamformation possible against this resistance? Let us consider the most striking case, in which the waking life has thrust the dream aside as though it
had never happened. If we take into consideration the play of the psychic forces, we are compelled to assert that the dream would never have
come into existence had the resistance prevailed at night as it did by day. We conclude, then, that the resistance loses some part of its force during
the night; we know that it has not been discontinued, as we have demonstrated its share in the formation of dreams - namely, the work of
distortion. We have therefore to consider the possibility that at night the resistance is merely diminished, and that dream-formation becomes
possible because of this slackening of the resistance; and we shall readily understand that as it regains its full power on waking it immediately
thrusts aside what it was forced to admit while it was feeble. Descriptive psychology teaches us that the chief determinant of dream-formation is
the dormant state of the psyche; and we may now add the following explanation: The state of sleep makes dream-formation possible by reducing
the endopsychic censorship.
We are certainly tempted to look upon this as the only possible conclusion to be drawn from the facts of dream-forgetting, and to develop from
this conclusion further deductions as to the comparative energy operative in the sleeping and waking states. But we shall stop here for the present.
When we have penetrated a little farther into the psychology of dreams we shall find that the origin of dream-formation may be differently
conceived. The resistance which tends to prevent the dream-thoughts from becoming conscious may perhaps be evaded without suffering
reduction. It is also plausible that both the factors which favour dream-formation, the reduction as well as the evasion of the resistance, may be
simultaneously made possible by the sleeping state. But we shall pause here, and resume the subject a little later.
We must now consider another series of objections against our procedure in dream-interpretation. For we proceed by dropping all the directing
ideas which at other times control reflection, directing our attention to a single element of the dream, noting the involuntary thoughts that
associate themselves with this element. We then take up the next component of the dream-content, and repeat the operation with this; and,
regardless of the direction taken by the thoughts, we allow ourselves to be led onwards by them, rambling from one subject to another. At the
same time, we harbour the confident hope that we may in the end, and without intervention on our part, come upon the dream-thoughts from
which the dream originated. To this the critic may make the following objection: That we arrive somewhere if we start from a single element of
the dream is not remarkable. Something can be associatively connected with every idea. The only thing that is remarkable is that one should
succeed in hitting upon the dream-thoughts in this arbitrary and aimless excursion. It is probably a self-deception; the investigator follows the
chain of associations from the one element which is taken up until he finds the chain breaking off, whereupon he takes up a second element; it is
thus only natural that the originally unconfined associations should now become narrowed down. He has the former chain of associations still in
mind, and will therefore in the analysis of the second dream-idea hit all the more readily upon single associations which have something in
common with the associations of the first chain. He then imagines that he has found a thought which represents a point of junction between two of
the dream-elements. As he allows himself all possible freedom of thought-connection, excepting only the transitions from one idea to another
which occur in normal thinking, it is not difficult for him finally to concoct out of a series of intermediary thoughts, something which he calls the
dream-thoughts; and without any guarantee, since they are otherwise unknown, he palms these off as the psychic equivalent of the dream. But all
this is a purely arbitrary procedure, an ingenious-looking exploitation of chance, and anyone who will go to this useless trouble can in this way
work out any desired interpretation for any dream whatever.
If such objections are really advanced against us, we may in defence refer to the impression produced by our dream-interpretations, the surprising
connections with other dream-elements which appear while we are following up the individual ideas, and the improbability that anything which
so perfectly covers and explains the dream as do our dream-interpretations could be achieved otherwise than by following previously established
psychic connections. We might also point to the fact that the procedure in dream-interpretation is identical with the procedure followed in the
resolution of hysterical symptoms, where the correctness of the method is attested by the emergence and disappearance of the symptoms - that is,
where the interpretation of the text is confirmed by the interpolated illustrations. But we have no reason to avoid this problem - namely, how one
can arrive at a pre-existent aim by following an arbitrarily and aimlessly maundering chain of thoughts - since we shall be able not to solve the
problem, it is true, but to get rid of it entirely. 
For it is demonstrably incorrect to state that we abandon ourselves to an aimless excursion of thought when, as in the interpretation of dreams, we
renounce reflection and allow the involuntary ideas to come to the surface. It can be shown that we are able to reject only those directing ideas
which are known to us, and that with the cessation of these the unknown - or, as we inexactly say, unconscious - directing ideas immediately exert
their influence, and henceforth determine the flow of the involuntary ideas. Thinking without directing ideas cannot be ensured by any influence
we ourselves exert on our own psychic life; neither do I know of any state of psychic derangement in which such a mode of thought establishes
itself.[11] The psychiatrists have here far too prematurely relinquished the idea of the solidity of the psychic structure. I know that an unregulated
stream of thoughts, devoid of directing ideas, can occur as little in the realm of hysteria and paranoia as in the formation or solution of dreams.
Perhaps it does not occur at all in the endogenous psychic affections, and, according to the ingenious hypothesis of Lauret, even the deliria
observed in confused psychic states have meaning and are incomprehensible to us only because of omissions. I have had the same conviction
whenever I have had an opportunity of observing such states. The deliria are the work of a censorship which no longer makes any effort to
conceal its sway, which, instead of lending its support to a revision that is no longer obnoxious to it, cancels regardlessly anything to which it
objects, thus causing the remnant to appear disconnected. This censorship proceeds like the Russian censorship on the frontier, which allows only
those foreign journals which have had certain passages blacked out to fall into the bands of the readers to be protected.
The free play of ideas following any chain of associations may perhaps occur in cases of destructive organic affections of the brain. What,
however, is taken to be such in the psychoneuroses may always be explained as the influence of the censorship on a series of thoughts which have
been pushed into the foreground by the concealed directing ideas.[12] It has been considered an unmistakable sign of free association
unencumbered by directing ideas if the emerging ideas (or images) appear to be connected by means of the so-called superficial associations - that
is, by assonance, verbal ambiguity, and temporal coincidence, without inner relationship of meaning; in other words, if they are connected by all
those associations which we allow ourselves to exploit in wit and playing upon words. This distinguishing mark holds good with associations
which lead us from the elements of the dream-content to the intermediary thoughts, and from these to the dream-thoughts proper; in many
analyses of dreams we have found surprising examples of this. In these no connection was too loose and no witticism too objectionable to serve
as a bridge from one thought to another. But the correct understanding of such surprising tolerance is not far to seek. Whenever one psychic
element is connected with another by an obnoxious and superficial association, there exists also a correct and more profound connection between
the two, which succumbs to the resistance of the censorship.
The correct explanation for the predominance of the superficial associations is the pressure of the censorship, and not the suppression of the
directing ideas. Whenever the censorship renders the normal connective paths impassable, the superficial associations will replace the deeper ones
in the representation. It is as though in a mountainous region a general interruption of traffic, for example an inundation, should render the broad
highways impassable: traffic would then have to be maintained by steep and inconvenient tracks used at other times only by the hunter.
We can here distinguish two cases which, however, are essentially one. In the first case, the censorship is directed only against the connection of
two thoughts which, being detached from one another, escape its opposition. The two thoughts then enter successively into consciousness; their
connection remains concealed; but in its place there occurs to us a superficial connection between the two which would not otherwise have
occurred to us, and which as a rule connects with another angle of the conceptual complex instead of that from which the suppressed but essential
connection proceeds. Or, in the second case, both thoughts, owing to their content, succumb to the censorship; both then appear not in their
correct form but in a modified, substituted form; and both substituted thoughts are so selected as to represent, by a superficial association, the
essential relation which existed between those that they have replaced. Under the pressure of the censorship, the displacement of a normal and
vital association by one superficial and apparently absurd has thus occurred in both cases.
Because we know of these displacements, we unhesitatingly rely upon even the superficial associations which occur in the course of dreaminterpretation.[13]
The psycho-analysis of neurotics makes abundant use of the two principles: that with the abandonment of the conscious directing ideas the
control over the flow of ideas is transferred to the concealed directing ideas; and that superficial associations are only a displacement-substitute
for suppressed and more profound ones. Indeed, psycho-analysis makes these two principles the foundation-stones of its technique. When I
request a patient to dismiss all reflection, and to report to me whatever comes into his mind, I firmly cling to the assumption that he will not be
able to drop the directing idea of the treatment, and I feel justified in concluding that what he reports, even though it may seem to be quite
ingenuous and arbitrary, has some connection with his morbid state. Another directing idea of which the patient has no suspicion is my own
personality. The full appreciation, as well as the detailed proof of both these explanations, belongs to the description of the psycho-analytic
technique as a therapeutic method. We have here reached one of the junctions, so to speak, at which we purposely drop the subject of dreaminterpretation.[14]
Of all the objections raised, only one is justified and still remains to be met; namely, that we ought not to ascribe all the associations of the
interpretation-work to the nocturnal dream - work. By interpretation in the waking state we are actually opening a path running back from the
dream-elements to the dream-thoughts. The dream-work has followed the contrary direction, and it is not at all probable that these paths are
equally passable in opposite directions. On the contrary, it appears that during the day, by means of new thought-connections, we sink shafts that
strike the intermediary thoughts and the dream-thoughts now in this place, now in that. We can see how the recent thought-material of the day
forces its way into the interpretation-series, and how the additional resistance which has appeared since the night probably compels it to make 
new and further detours. But the number and form of the collaterals which we thus contrive during the day are, psychologically speaking,
indifferent, so long as they point the way to the dream-thoughts which we are seeking. 
Now that we have defended ourselves against the objections raised, or have at least indicated our weapons of defence, we must no longer delay
entering upon the psychological investigations for which we have so long been preparing. Let us summarize the main results of our recent
investigations: The dream is a psychic act full of import; its motive power is invariably a wish craving fulfilment; the fact that it is unrecognizable
as a wish, and its many peculiarities and absurdities, are due to the influence of the psychic censorship to which it has been subjected during its
formation. Besides the necessity of evading the censorship, the following factors have played a part in its formation: first, a need for condensing
the psychic material; second, regard for representability in sensory images; and third (though not constantly), regard for a rational and intelligible
exterior of the dream-structure. From each of these propositions a path leads onward to psychological postulates and assumptions. Thus, the
reciprocal relation of the wish-motives, and the four conditions. as well as the mutual relations of these conditions, must now be investigated; the
dream must be inserted in the context of the psychic life.
At the beginning of this section we cited a certain dream in order that it might remind us of the problems that are still unsolved. The interpretation
of this dream (of the burning child) presented no difficulties, although in the analytical sense it was not given in full. We asked ourselves why,
after all, it was necessary that the father should dream instead of waking, and we recognized the wish to represent the child as living as a motive
of the dream. That there was yet another wish operative in the dream we shall be able to show after further discussion. For the present, however,
we may say that for the sake of the wish-fulfilment the thought-process of sleep was transformed into a dream.
If the wish-fulfilment is cancelled out, only one characteristic remains which distinguishes the two kinds of psychic events. The dream-thought
would have been: "I see a glimmer coming from the room in which the body is lying. Perhaps a candle has fallen over, and the child is burning!"
The dream reproduces the result of this reflection unchanged, but represents it in a situation which exists in the present and is perceptible by the
senses like an experience of the waking state. This, however, is the most common and the most striking psychological characteristic of the dream;
a thought, usually the one wished for, is objectified in the dream, and represented as a scene, or - as we think - experienced.
But how are we now to explain this characteristic peculiarity of the dream-work, or - to put it more modestly - how are we to bring it into relation
with the psychic processes?
On closer examination, it is plainly evident that the manifest form of the dream is marked by two characteristics which are almost independent of
each other. One is its representation as a present situation with the omission of perhaps; the other is the translation of the thought into visual
images and speech.
The transformation to which the dream-thoughts are subjected because the expectation is put into the present tense is, perhaps, in this particular
dream not so very striking. This is probably due to the special and really subsidiary role of the wish-fulfilment in this dream. Let us take another
dream, in which the dream-wish does not break away from the continuation of the waking thoughts in sleep; for example, the dream of Irma's
injection. Here the dream-thought achieving representation is in the conditional: "If only Otto could be blamed for Irma's illness!" The dream
suppresses the conditional, and replaces it by a simple present tense: "Yes, Otto is to blame for Irma's illness." This, then, is the first of the
transformations which even the undistorted dream imposes on the dream-thoughts. But we will not linger over this first peculiarity of the dream.
We dispose of it by a reference to the conscious phantasy, the day-dream, which behaves in a similar fashion with its conceptual content. When
Daudet's M. Joyeuse wanders unemployed through the streets of Paris while his daughter is led to believe that he has a post and is sitting in his
office, he dreams, in the present tense, of circumstances that might help him to obtain a recommendation and employment. The dream, then,
employs the present tense in the same manner and with the same right as the day-dream. The present is the tense in which the wish is represented
as fulfilled.
The second quality peculiar to the dream alone, as distinguished from the day-dream, is that the conceptual content is not thought, but is
transformed into visual images, to which we give credence, and which we believe that we experience. Let us add. however, that not all dreams
show this transformation of ideas into visual images. There are dreams which consist solely of thoughts, but we cannot on that account deny that
they are substantially dreams. My dream Autodidasker - the day-phantasy about Professor N is of this character; it is almost as free of visual
elements as though I had thought its content during the day. Moreover, every long dream contains elements which have not undergone this
transformation into the visual, and which are simply thought or known as we are wont to think or know in our waking state. And we must here
reflect that this transformation of ideas into visual images does not occur in dreams alone, but also in hallucinations and visions, which may
appear spontaneously in health, or as symptoms in the psychoneuroses. In brief, the relation which we are here investigating is by no means an
exclusive one; the fact remains, however, that this characteristic of the dream, whenever it occurs, seems to be its most noteworthy characteristic,
so that we cannot think of the dream-life without it. To understand it, however, requires a very exhaustive discussion.
Among all the observations relating to the theory of dreams to be found in the literature of the subject, I should like to lay stress upon one as
being particularly worthy of mention. The famous G. T. H. Fechner makes the conjecture,[15] in a discussion as to the nature of the dreams, that 
the dream is staged elsewhere than in the waking ideation. No other assumption enables us to comprehend the special peculiarities of the dreamlife.
The idea which is thus put before us is one of psychic locality. We shall wholly ignore the fact that the psychic apparatus concerned is known to
us also as an anatomical preparation, and we shall carefully avoid the temptation to determine the psychic locality in any anatomical sense. We
shall remain on psychological ground, and we shall do no more than accept the invitation to think of the instrument which serves the psychic
activities much as we think of a compound microscope, a photographic camera, or other apparatus. The psychic locality, then, corresponds to a
place within such an apparatus in which one of the preliminary phases of the image comes into existence. As is well known, there are in the
microscope and the telescope such ideal localities or planes, in which no tangible portion of the apparatus is located. I think it superfluous to
apologize for the imperfections of this and all similar figures. These comparisons are designed only to assist us in our attempt to make intelligible
the complication of the psychic performance by dissecting it and referring the individual performances to the individual components of the
apparatus. So far as I am aware, no attempt has yet been made to divine the construction of the psychic instrument by means of such dissection. I
see no harm in such an attempt; I think that we should give free rein to our conjectures, provided we keep our heads and do not mistake the
scaffolding for the building. Since for the first approach to any unknown subject we need the help only of auxiliary ideas, we shall prefer the
crudest and most tangible hypothesis to all others.
Accordingly, we conceive the psychic apparatus as a compound instrument, the component parts of which we shall call instances, or, for the sake
of clearness, systems. We shall then anticipate that these systems may perhaps maintain a constant spatial orientation to one another, very much
as do the different and successive systems of lenses of a telescope. Strictly speaking, there is no need to assume an actual spatial arrangement of
the psychic system. It will be enough for our purpose if a definite sequence is established, so that in certain psychic events the system will be
traversed by the excitation in a definite temporal order. This order may be different in the case of other processes; such a possibility is left open.
For the sake of brevity, we shall henceforth speak of the component parts of the apparatus as Psi-systems.
The first thing that strikes us is the fact that the apparatus composed of Psi-systems has a direction. All our psychic activities proceed from (inner
or outer) stimuli and terminate in innervations. We thus ascribe to the apparatus a sensory and a motor end; at the sensory end we find a system
which receives the perceptions, ind at the motor end another which opens the sluices of motility. The psychic process generally runs from the
perceptive end to the motor end. The most general scheme of the psychic apparatus has therefore the following appearance as shown in Fig. 1.
(See illustration.) But this is only in compliance with the requirement, long familiar to us, that the psychic apparatus must be constructed like a
reflex apparatus. The reflex act remains the type of every psychic activity as well.
We now have reason to admit a first differentiation at the sensory end. The percepts that come to us leave in our psychic apparatus a trace, which
we may call a memory-trace. The function related to this memory-trace we call the memory. If we hold seriously to our resolution to connect the
psychic processes into systems, the memory-trace can consist only of lasting changes in the elements of the systems. But, as has already been
shown elsewhere, obvious difficulties arise when one and the same system is faithfully to preserve changes in its elements and still to remain
fresh and receptive in respect of new occasions of change. In accordance with the principle which is directing our attempt, we shall therefore
ascribe these two functions to two different systems. We assume that an initial system of this apparatus receives the stimuli of perception but
retains nothing of them - that is, it has no memory; and that behind this there lies a second system, which transforms the momentary excitation of
the first into lasting traces. The following would then be the diagram of our psychic apparatus: (See illustration.)
We know that of the percepts which act upon the P-system, we retain permanently something else as well as the content itself. Our percepts prove
also to be connected with one another in the memory, and this is especially so if they originally occurred simultaneously. We call this the fact of
association. It is now clear that, if the P-system is entirely lacking in memory, it certainly cannot preserve traces for the associations; the
individual P-elements would be intolerably hindered in their functioning if a residue of a former connection should make its influence felt against
a new perception. Hence we must rather assume that the memory-system is the basis of association. The fact of association, then, consists in this -
that in consequence of a lessening of resistance and a smoothing of the ways from one of the mem-elements, the excitation transmits itself to a
second rather than to a third mem-element.
On further investigation we find it necessary to assume not one but many such mem-systems, in which the same excitation transmitted by the Pelements undergoes a diversified fixation. The first of these mem-systems will in any case contain the fixation of the association through
simultaneity, while in those lying farther away the same material of excitation will be arranged according to other forms of combination; so that
relationships of similarity, etc., might perhaps be represented by these later systems. It would, of course, be idle to attempt to express in words the
psychic significance of such a system. Its characteristic would lie in the intimacy of its relations to elements of raw material of memory - that is
(if we wish to hint at a more comprehensive theory) in the gradations of the conductive resistance on the way to these elements.
An observation of a general nature, which may possibly point to something of importance, may here be interpolated. The P-system, which
possesses no capacity for preserving changes, and hence no memory, furnishes to consciousness the complexity and variety of the sensory
qualities. Our memories, on the other hand, are unconscious in themselves; those that are most deeply impressed form no exception. They can be
made conscious, but there is no doubt that they unfold all their activities in the unconscious state. What we term our character is based, indeed, on
the memory - traces of our impressions, and it is precisely those impressions that have affected us most strongly, those of our early youth, which
hardly ever become conscious. But when memories become conscious again they show no sensory quality, or a very negligible one in comparison 
with the perceptions. If, now, it can be confirmed that for consciousness memory and quality are mutually exclusive in the Psi-systems, we have
gained a most promising insight into the determinations of the neuron excitations.[16]
What we have so far assumed concerning the composition of the psychic apparatus at the sensible end has been assumed regardless of dreams and
of the psychological explanations which we have hitherto derived from them. Dreams, however, will serve as a source of evidence for our
knowledge of another part of the apparatus. We have seen that it was impossible to explain dream-formation unless we ventured to assume two
psychic instances, one of which subjected the activities of the other to criticism, the result of which was exclusion from consciousness.
We have concluded that the criticizing instance maintains closer relations with the consciousness than the instance criticized. It stands between
the latter and the consciousness like a screen. Further, we have found that there is reason to identify the criticizing instance with that which directs
our waking life and determines our voluntary conscious activities. If, in accordance with our assumptions, we now replace these instances by
systems, the criticizing system will therefore be moved to the motor end. We now enter both systems in our diagram, expressing, by the names
given them, their relation to consciousness. (See illustration.)
The last of the systems at the motor end we call the preconscious (Pcs.) to denote that the exciting processes in this system can reach
consciousness without any further detention, provided certain other conditions are fulfilled, e.g., the attainment of a definite degree of intensity, a
certain apportionment of that function which we must call attention, etc. This is at the same time the system which holds the keys of voluntary
motility. The system behind it we call the unconscious (Ucs), because it has no access to consciousness except through the preconscious, in the
passage through which the excitation-process must submit to certain changes.[17]
In which of these systems, then, do we localize the impetus to dream-formation? For the sake of simplicity, let us say in the system Ucs. We shall
find, it is true, in subsequent discussions, that this is not altogether correct; that dream-formation is obliged to make connection with dreamthoughts which belong to the system of the preconscious. But we shall learn elsewhere, when we come to deal with the dream-wish, that the
motive-power of the dream is furnished by the Ucs, and on account of this factor we shall assume the unconscious system as the starting-point for
dream-formation. This dream-excitation, like all the other thought-structures, will now strive to continue itself in the Pcs, and thence to gain
admission to the consciousness.
Experience teaches us that the path leading through the preconscious to consciousness is closed to the dream-thoughts during the day by the
resisting censorship. At night they gain admission to consciousness; the question arises: In what way and because of what changes? If this
admission were rendered possible to the dream-thoughts by the weakening, during the night, of the resistance watching on the boundary between
the unconscious and the preconscious, we should then have dreams in the material of our ideas, which would not display the hallucinatory
character that interests us at present.
The weakening of the censorship between the two systems, Ucs and Pcs, can explain to us only such dreams as the Autodidasker dream but not
dreams like that of the burning child, which - as will be remembered - we stated as a problem at the outset in our present investigations.
What takes place in the hallucinatory dream we can describe in no other way than by saying that the excitation follows a retrogressive course. It
communicates itself not to the motor end of the apparatus, but to the sensory end, and finally reaches the system of perception. If we call the
direction which the psychic process follows from the unconscious into the waking state progressive, we may then speak of the dream as having a
regressive character.[18]
This regression is therefore assuredly one of the most important psychological peculiarities of the dream-process; but we must not forget that it is
not characteristic of the dream alone. Intentional recollection and other component processes of our normal thinking likewise necessitate a
retrogression in the psychic apparatus from some complex act of ideation to the raw material of the memory-traces which underlie it. But during
the waking state this turning backwards does not reach beyond the memory-images; it is incapable of producing the hallucinatory revival of the
perceptual images. Why is it otherwise in dreams? When we spoke of the condensation-work of the dream we could not avoid the assumption that
by the dream-work the intensities adhering to the ideas are completely transferred from one to another. It is probably this modification of the
usual psychic process which makes possible the cathexis[19] of the system of P to its full sensory vividness in the reverse direction to thinking. -
I hope that we are not deluding ourselves as regards the importance of this present discussion. We have done nothing more than give a name to an
inexplicable phenomenon. We call it regression if the idea in the dream is changed back into the visual image from which it once originated. But
even this step requires justification. Why this definition if it does not teach us anything new? Well, I believe that the word regression is of service
to us, inasmuch as it connects a fact familiar to us with the scheme of the psychic apparatus endowed with direction. At this point, and for the first
time, we shall profit by the fact that we have constructed such a scheme. For with the help of this scheme we shall perceive, without further
reflection, another peculiarity of dream-formation. If we look upon the dream as a process of regression within the hypothetical psychic
apparatus, we have at once an explanation of the empirically proven fact that all thought-relations of the dream-thoughts are either lost in the
dream-work or have difficulty in achieving expression. According to our scheme, these thought-relations are contained not in the first memsystems, but in those lying farther to the front, and in the regression to the perceptual images they must forfeit expression. In regression, the
structure of the dream-thoughts breaks up into its raw material. 
But what change renders possible this regression which is impossible during the day? Let us here be content with an assumption. There must
evidently be changes in the cathexis of the individual systems, causing the latter to become more accessible or inaccessible to the discharge of the
excitation; but in any such apparatus the same effect upon the course of the excitation might be produced by more than one kind of change. We
naturally think of the. sleeping state, and of the many cathectic changes which this evokes at the sensory end of the apparatus. During the day
there is a continuous stream flowing from the Psi-system of the P toward the motility end; this current ceases at night, and can no longer block the
flow of the current of excitation in the opposite direction. This would appear to be that seclusion from the outer world which, according to the
theory of some writers, is supposed to explain the psychological character of the dream. In the explanation of the regression of the dream we
shall, however, have to take into account those other regressions which occur during morbid waking states. In these other forms of regression the
explanation just given plainly leaves us in the lurch. Regression occurs in spite of the uninterrupted sensory current in a progressive direction.
The hallucinations of hysteria and paranoia, as well as the visions of mentally normal persons, I would explain as corresponding, in fact, to
regressions, i.e., to thoughts transformed into images; and would assert that only such thoughts undergo this transformation as are in intimate
connection with suppressed memories, or with memories which have remained unconscious. As an example, I will cite the case of one of my
youngest hysterical patients - a boy of twelve, who was prevented from falling asleep by "green faces with red eyes," which terrified him. The
source of this manifestation was the suppressed, but once conscious memory of a boy whom he had often seen four years earlier, and who offered
a warning example of many bad habits, including masturbation, for which he was now reproaching himself. At that time his mother had noticed
that the complexion of this ill-mannered boy was greenish and that he had red (i.e., red-rimmed) eyes. Hence his terrifying vision, which merely
determined his recollection of another saying of his mother's, to the effect that such boys become demented, are unable to learn anything at
school, and are doomed to an early death. A part of this prediction came true in the case of my little patient; he could not get on at school, and, as
appeared from his involuntary associations, he was in terrible dread of the remainder of the prophecy. However, after a brief period of successful
treatment his sleep was restored, his anxiety removed, and he finished his scholastic year with an excellent record.
Here I may add the interpretation of a vision described to me by an hysterical woman of forty, as having occurred when she was in normal health.
One morning she opened her eyes and saw her brother in the room, although she knew him to be confined in an insane asylum. Her little son was
asleep by her side. Lest the child should be frightened on seeing his uncle, and fall into convulsions, she pulled the sheet over his face. This done,
the phantom disappeared. This apparition was the revision of one of her childish memories, which, although conscious, was most intimately
connected with all the unconscious material in her mind. Her nurserymaid had told her that her mother, who had died young (my patient was then
only eighteen months old), had suffered from epileptic or hysterical convulsions, which dated back to a fright caused by her brother (the patient's
uncle) who appeared to her disguised as a spectre with a sheet over his head. The vision contains the same elements as the reminiscence, viz., the
appearance of the brother, the sheet, the fright, and its effect. These elements, however, are arranged in a fresh context, and are transferred to
other persons. The obvious motive of the vision, and the thought which it replaced, was her solicitude lest her little son, who bore a striking
resemblance to his uncle, should share the latter's fate.
Both examples here cited are not entirely unrelated to the state of sleep, and may for that reason be unfitted to afford the evidence for the sake of
which I have cited them. I will, therefore, refer to my analysis of an hallucinatory paranoic woman patient[20] and to the results of my hitherto
unpublished studies on the psychology of the psychoneuroses, in order to emphasize the fact that in these cases of regressive thoughttransformation one must not overlook the influence of a suppressed memory, or one that has remained unconscious, this being usually of an
infantile character. This memory draws into the regression, as it were, the thoughts with which it is connected, and which are kept from
expression by the censorship - that is, into that form of representation in which the memory itself is psychically existent. And here I may add, as a
result of my studies of hysteria, that if one succeeds in bringing to consciousness infantile scenes (whether they are recollections or phantasies)
they appear as hallucinations, and are divested of this character only when they are communicated. It is known also that even in persons whose
memories are not otherwise visual, the earliest infantile memories remain vividly visual until late in life.
If, now, we bear in mind the part played in the dream-thoughts by the infantile experiences, or by the phantasies based upon them, and recollect
how often fragments of these re-emerge in the dream-content, and how even the dream-wishes often proceed from them, we cannot deny the
probability that in dreams, too, the transformation of thoughts into visual images may be the result of the attraction exercised by the visually
represented memory, striving for resuscitation, upon the thoughts severed from the consciousness and struggling for expression. Pursuing this
conception. we may further describe the dream as the substitute for the infantile scene modified by transference to recent material. The infantile
scene cannot enforce its own revival, and must therefore be satisfied to return as a dream.
This reference to the significance of the infantile scenes (or of their phantastic repetitions) as in a certain degree furnishing the pattern for the
dream-content renders superfluous the assumption made by Scherner and his pupils concerning inner sources of stimuli. Scherner assumes a state
of visual excitation, of internal excitation in the organ of sight, when the dreams manifest a special vividness or an extraordinary abundance of
visual elements. We need raise no objection to this assumption; we may perhaps content ourselves with assuming such a state of excitation only
for the psychic perceptive system of the organ of vision; we shall, however, insist that this state of excitation is a reanimation by the memory of a
former actual visual excitation. I cannot, from my own experience, give a good example showing such an influence of an infantile memory; my
own dreams are altogether less rich in perceptual elements than I imagine those of others to be; but in my most beautiful and most vivid dream of
late years I can easily trace the hallucinatory distinctness of the dream-contents to the visual qualities of recently received impressions. In chapter
VI., H, I mentioned a dream in which the dark blue of the water, the brown of the smoke issuing from the ship's funnels, and the sombre brown 
and red of the buildings which I saw made a profound and lasting impression upon my mind. This dream, if any, must be attributed to visual
excitation, but what was it that had brought my organ of vision into this excitable state? It was a recent impression which had joined itself to a
series of former impressions. The colours I beheld were in the first place those of the toy blocks with which my children had erected a
magnificent building for my admiration, on the day preceding the dream. There was the sombre red on the large blocks, the blue and brown on the
small ones. Joined to these were the colour impressions of my last journey in Italy: the beautiful blue of the Isonzo and the lagoons, the brown
hue of the Alps. The beautiful colours seen in the dream were but a repetition of those seen in memory.
Let us summarize what we have learned about this peculiarity of dreams: their power of recasting their idea-content in visual images. We may not
have explained this character of the dream-work by referring it to the known laws of psychology, but we have singled it out as pointing to
unknown relations, and have given it the name of the regressive character. Wherever such regression has occurred, we have regarded it as an
effect of the resistance which opposes the progress of thought on its normal way to consciousness, and of the simultaneous attraction exerted
upon it by vivid memories. [21] The regression in dreams is perhaps facilitated by the cessation of the progressive stream flowing from the senseorgans during the day; for which auxiliary factor there must be some compensation, in the other forms of regression, by the strengthening of the
other regressive motives. We must also bear in mind that in pathological cases of regression, just as in dreams, the process of energy-transference
must be different from that occurring in the regressions of normal psychic life, since it renders possible a full hallucinatory cathexis of the
perceptive system. What we have described in the analysis of the dream-work as regard for representability may be referred to the selective
attraction of visually remembered scenes touched by the dream-thoughts.
As to the regression, we may further observe that it plays a no less important part in the theory of neurotic symptom-formation than in the theory
of dreams. We may therefore distinguish a threefold species of regression: (a) a topical one, in the sense of the scheme of the Psi-systems here
exponded; (b) a temporal one, in so far as it is a regression to older psychic formations; and (c) a formal one, when primitive modes of expression
and representation take the place of the customary modes. These three forms of regression are, however, basically one, and in the majority of
cases they coincide, for that which is older in point of time is at the same time formally primitive and, in the psychic topography, nearer to the
perception-end.
We cannot leave the theme of regression in dreams without giving utterance to an impression which has already and repeatedly forced itself upon
us, and which will return to us reinforced after a deeper study of the psychoneuroses: namely, that dreaming is on the whole an act of regression
to the earliest relationships of the dreamer, a resuscitation of his childhood, of the impulses which were then dominant and the modes of
expression which were then available. Behind this childhood of the individual we are then promised an insight into the phylogenetic childhood,
into the evolution of the human race, of which the development of the individual is only an abridged repetition influenced by the fortuitous
circumstances of life. We begin to suspect that Friedrich Nietzsche was right when he said that in a dream "there persists a primordial part of
humanity which we can no longer reach by a direct path," and we are encouraged to expect, from the analysis of dreams, a knowledge of the
archaic inheritance of man, a knowledge of psychical things in him that are innate. It would seem that dreams and neuroses have preserved for us
more of the psychical antiquities than we suspected; so that psycho-analysis may claim a high rank among those sciences which endeavour to
reconstruct the oldest and darkest phases of the beginnings of mankind.
It is quite possible that we shall not find this first part of our psychological evaluation of dreams particularly satisfying. We must, however,
console ourselves with the thought that we are, after all, compelled to build out into the dark. If we have not gone altogether astray, we shall
surely reach approximately the same place from another starting-point, and then, perhaps, we shall be better able to find our bearings. 

The dream of the burning child (cited above) affords us a welcome opportunity for appreciating the difficulties confronting the theory of wishfulfilment. That a dream should be nothing but a wish-fulfilment must undoubtedly seem strange to us all - and not only because of the
contradiction offered by the anxiety-dream. Once our first analyses had given us the enlightenment that meaning and psychic value are concealed
behind our dreams, we could hardly have expected so unitary a determination of this meaning. According to the correct but summary definition of
Aristotle, the dream is a continuation of thinking in sleep. Now if, during the day, our thoughts perform such a diversity of psychic acts -
judgments, conclusions, the answering of objections, expectations, intentions, etc. - why should they be forced at night to confine themselves to
the production of wishes only? Are there not, on the contrary, many dreams that present an altogether different psychic act in dream-form - for
example, anxious care - and is not the father's unusually transparent dream of the burning child such a dream? From the gleam of light that falls
upon his eyes while he is asleep the father draws the apprehensive conclusion that a candle has fallen over and may be burning the body; he
transforms this conclusion into a dream by embodying it in an obvious situation enacted in the present tense. What part is played in this dream by
the wish-fulfilment? And how can we possibly mistake the predominance of the thought continued from the waking state or evoked by the new
sensory impression?
All these considerations are justified, and force us to look more closely into the role of the wish-fulfilment in dreams, and the significance of the
waking thoughts continued in sleep.
It is precisely the wish-fulfilment that has already caused us to divide all dreams into two groups. We have found dreams which were plainly wish-
fulfilments; and others in which the wish-fulfilment was unrecognizable and was often concealed by every available means. In this latter class of
dreams we recognized the influence of the dream-censorship. The undisguised wish-dreams were found chiefly in children; short, frank wishdreams seemed (I purposely emphasize this word) to occur also in adults.
We may now ask whence in each case does the wish that is realized in the dream originate? But to what opposition or to what diversity do we
relate this whence? I think to the opposition between conscious daily life and an unconscious psychic activity which is able to make itself
perceptible only at night. I thus, find a threefold possibility for the origin of a wish. Firstly, it may have been excited during the day, and owing to
external circumstances may have remained unsatisfied; there is thus left for the night an acknowledged and unsatisfied wish. Secondly, it may
have emerged during the day, only to be rejected; there is thus left for the night an unsatisfied but suppressed wish. Thirdly, it may have no
relation to daily life, but may belong to those wishes which awake only at night out of the suppressed material in us. If we turn to our scheme of
the psychic apparatus, we can localize a wish of the first order in the system Pcs. We may assume that a wish of the second order has been forced
back from the Pcs system into the Ucs system, where alone, if anywhere, can it maintain itself; as for the wish-impulse of the third order, we
believe that it is wholly incapable of leaving the Ucs system. Now, have the wishes arising from these different sources the same value for the
dream, the same power to incite a dream?
On surveying the dreams at our disposal with a view to answering this question, we are at once moved to add as a fourth source of the dream-wish
the actual wish-impetus which arises during the night (for example, the stimulus of thirst, and sexual desire). It then seems to us probable that the
source of the dream-wish does not affect its capacity to incite a dream. I have in mind the dream of the child who continued the voyage that had
been interrupted during the day, and the other children's dreams cited in the same chapter; they are explained by an unfulfilled but unsuppressed
wish of the daytime. That wishes suppressed during the day assert themselves in dreams is shown by a great many examples. I will mention a
very simple dream of this kind. A rather sarcastic lady, whose younger friend has become engaged to be married, is asked in the daytime by her
acquaintances whether she knows her friend's fiance, and what she thinks of him. She replies with unqualified praise, imposing silence on her
own judgment, although she would have liked to tell the truth, namely, that he is a commonplace fellow - one meets such by the dozen
(Dutzendmensch). The following night she dreams that the same question is put to her, and that she replies with the formula: "In case of
subsequent orders, it will suffice to mention the reference number." Finally, as the result of numerous analyses, we learn that the wish in all
dreams that have been subject to distortion has its origin in the unconscious, and could not become perceptible by day. At first sight, then, it
seems that in respect of dream-formation all wishes are of equal value and equal power.
I cannot prove here that this is not really the true state of affairs, but I am strongly inclined to assume a stricter determination of the dream-wish.
Children's dreams leave us in no doubt that a wish unfulfilled during the day may instigate a dream. But we must not forget that this is, after all,
the wish of a child; that it is a wish-impulse of the strength peculiar to childhood. I very much doubt whether a wish unfulfilled in the daytime
would suffice to create a dream in an adult. It would rather seem that, as we learn to control our instinctual life by intellection, we more and more
renounce as unprofitable the formation or retention of such intense wishes as are natural to childhood. In this, indeed, there may be individual
variations; some retain the infantile type of the psychic processes longer than others; just as we find such differences in the gradual decline of the
originally vivid visual imagination. In general, however, I am of the opinion that unfulfilled wishes of the day are insufficient to produce a dream
in adults. I will readily admit that the wish-impulses originating in consciousness contribute to the instigation of dreams, but they probably do no
more. The dream would not occur if the preconscious wish were not reinforced from another source.
That source is the unconscious. I believe that the conscious wish becomes effective in exciting a dream only when it succeeds in arousing a
similar unconscious wish which reinforces it. From the indications obtained in the psychoanalysis of the neuroses, I believe that these
unconscious wishes are always active and ready to express themselves whenever they find an opportunity of allying themselves with an impulse
from consciousness, and transferring their own greater intensity to the lesser intensity of the latter.[22] It must, therefore, seem that the conscious
wish alone has been realized in the dream; but a slight peculiarity in the form of the dream will put us on the track of the powerful ally from the
unconscious. These ever-active and, as it were, immortal wishes of our unconscious recall the legendary Titans who, from time immemorial, have
been buried under the mountains which were once hurled upon them by the victorious gods, and even now quiver from time to time at the
convulsions of their mighty limbs. These wishes, existing in repression, are themselves of infantile origin, as we learn from the psychological
investigation of the neuroses. Let me, therefore, set aside the view previously expressed, that it matters little whence the dream-wish originates,
and replace it by another, namely: the wish manifested in the dream must be an infantile wish. In the adult it originates in the Ucs, while in the
child, in whom no division and censorship exist as yet between the Pcs and Ucs, or in whom these are only in process of formation, it is an
unfulfilled and unrepressed wish from the waking state. I am aware that this conception cannot be generally demonstrated, but I maintain that it
can often be demonstrated even where one would not have suspected it, and that it cannot be generally refuted. -
In dream-formation, the wish-impulses which are left over from the conscious waking life are, therefore, to be relegated to the background. I
cannot admit that they play any part except that attributed to the material of actual sensations during sleep in relation to the dream-content. If I
now take into account those other psychic instigations left over from the waking life of the day, which are not wishes, I shall merely be adhering
to the course mapped out for me by this line of thought. We may succeed in provisionally disposing of the energetic cathexis of our waking
thoughts by deciding to go to sleep. He is a good sleeper who can do this; Napoleon I is reputed to have been a model of this kind. But we do not
always succeed in doing it, or in doing it completely. Unsolved problems, harassing cares, overwhelming impressions, continue the activity of our
thought even during sleep, maintaining psychic processes in the system which we have termed the preconscious. The thought-impulses continued
into sleep may be divided into the following groups: 
1. Those which have not been completed during the day, owing to some accidental cause.
2. Those which have been left uncompleted because our mental powers have failed us, i.e., unsolved problems.
3. Those which have been turned back and suppressed during the day. This is reinforced by a powerful fourth group:
4. Those which have been excited in our Ucs during the day by the workings of the Pcs; and finally we may add a fifth, consisting of:
5. The indifferent impressions of the day, which have therefore been left unsettled.
We need not underrate the psychic intensities introduced into sleep by these residues of the day's waking life, especially those emanating from the
group of the unsolved issues. It is certain that these excitations continue to strive for expression during the night, and we may assume with equal
certainty that the state of sleep renders impossible the usual continuance of the process of excitation in the preconscious and its termination in
becoming conscious. In so far as we can become conscious of our mental processes in the ordinary way, even during the night, to that extent we
are simply not asleep. I cannot say what change is produced in the Pcs system by the state of sleep,[23] but there is no doubt that the
psychological characteristics of sleep are to be sought mainly in the cathectic changes occurring just in this system, which dominates, moreover,
the approach to motility, paralysed during sleep. On the other hand, I have found nothing in the psychology of dreams to warrant the assumption
that sleep produces any but secondary changes in the conditions of the Ucs system. Hence, for the nocturnal excitations in the Pcs there remains
no other path than that taken by the wish-excitations from the Ucs; they must seek reinforcement from the Ucs, and follow the detours of the
unconscious excitations. But what is the relation of the preconscious day-residues to the dream? There is no doubt that they penetrate abundantly
into the dream; that they utilize the dream-content to obtrude themselves upon consciousness even during the night; indeed, they sometimes even
dominate the dream-content, and impel it to continue the work of the day; it is also certain that the day-residues may just as well have any other
character as that of wishes. But it is highly instructive, and for the theory of wish-fulfilment of quite decisive importance, to see what conditions
they must comply with in order to be received into the dream.
Let us pick out one of the dreams cited above, e.g., the dream in which my friend Otto seems to show the symptoms of Basedow's disease
(chapter V., D). Otto's appearance gave me some concern during the day, and this worry, like everything else relating to him, greatly affected me.
I may assume that this concern followed me into sleep. I was probably bent on finding out what was the matter with him. During the night my
concern found expression in the dream which I have recorded. Not only was its content senseless, but it failed to show any wish-fulfilment. But I
began to search for the source of this incongruous expression of the solicitude felt during the day, and analysis revealed a connection. I identified
my friend Otto with a certain Baron L and myself with a Professor R. There was only one explanation of my being impelled to select just this
substitute for the day-thought. I must always have been ready in the Ucs to identify myself with Professor R, as this meant the realization of one
of the immortal infantile wishes, viz., the wish to become great. Repulsive ideas respecting my friend, ideas that would certainly have been
repudiated in a waking state, took advantage of the opportunity to creep into the dream; but the worry of the day had likewise found some sort of
expression by means of a substitute in the dream-content. The day-thought, which was in itself not a wish, but on the contrary a worry, had in
some way to find a connection with some infantile wish, now unconscious and suppressed, which then allowed it - duly dressed up - to arise for
consciousness. The more domineering the worry the more forced could be the connection to be established; between the content of the wish and
that of the worry there need be no connection, nor was there one in our example.
It would perhaps be appropriate, in dealing with this problem, to inquire how a dream behaves when material is offered to it in the dreamthoughts which flatly opposes a wish-fulfilment; such as justified worries, painful reflections and distressing realizations. The many possible
results may be classified as follows: (a) The dream-work succeeds in replacing all painful ideas by contrary ideas. and suppressing the painful
affect belonging to them. This, then, results in a pure and simple satisfaction-dream, a palpable wish-fulfilment, concerning which there is
nothing more to be said. (b) The painful ideas find their way into the manifest dream-content, more or less modified, but nevertheless quite
recognizable. This is the case which raises doughts about the wish-theory of dreams, and thus calls for further investigation. Such dreams with a
painful content may either be indifferent in feeling, or they may convey the whole painful affect, which the ideas contained in them seem to
justify, or they may even lead to the development of anxiety to the point of waking.
Analysis then shows that even these painful dreams are wish-fulfilments. An unconscious and repressed wish, whose fulfilment could only be felt
as painful by the dreamer's ego, has seized the opportunity offered by the continued cathexis of painful day-residues, has lent them its support,
and has thus made them capable of being dreamed. But whereas in case (a) the unconscious wish coincided with the conscious one, in case (b) the
discord between the unconscious and the conscious - the repressed material and the ego - is revealed, and the situation in the fairy-tale, of the
three wishes which the fairy offers to the married couple, is realized (see p. 534 below). The gratification in respect of the fulfilment of the
repressed wish may prove to be so great that it balances the painful affects adhering to the day-residues; the dream is then indifferent in its
affective tone, although it is on the one hand the fulfilment of a wish, and on the other the fulfilment of a fear. Or it may happen that the sleeper's
ego plays an even more extensive part in the dream-formation, that it reacts with violent resentment to the accomplished satisfaction of the
repressed wish, and even goes so far as to make an end of the dream by means of anxiety. It is thus not difficult to recognize that dreams of pain
and anxiety are, in accordance with our theory, just as much wish-fulfilments as are the straightforward dreams of gratification. 
Painful dreams may also be punishment dreams. It must be admitted that the recognition of these dreams adds something that is, in a certain
sense, new to the theory of dreams. What is fulfilled by them is once more an unconscious wish - the wish for the punishment of the dreamer for a
repressed, prohibited wish - impulse. To this extent, these dreams comply with the requirement here laid down: that the motive-power behind the
dream-formation must be furnished by a wish belonging to the unconscious. But a finer psychological dissection allows us to recognize the
difference between this and the other wish-dreams. In the dreams of group (b) the unconscious dream-forming wish belonged to the repressed
material. In the punishment-dreams it is likewise an unconscious wish, but one which we must attribute not to the repressed material but to the
ego.
Punishment-dreams point, therefore, to the possibility of a still more extensive participation of the ego in dream-formation. The mechanism of
dream-formation becomes indeed in every way more transparent if in place of the antithesis conscious and unconscious, we put the antithesis: ego
and repressed. This, however, cannot be done without taking into account what happens in the psychoneuroses, and for this reason it has not been
done in this book. Here I need only remark that the occurrence of punishment-dreams is not generally subject to the presence of painful dayresidues. They originate, indeed, most readily if the contrary is true, if the thoughts which are day-residues are of a gratifying nature, but express
illicit gratifications. Of these thoughts nothing, then, finds its way into the manifest dream except their contrary, just as was the case in the dreams
of group (a). Thus it would be the essential characteristic of punishment-dreams that in them it is not the unconscious wish from the repressed
material (from the system Ucs) that is responsible for dream-formation but the punitive wish reacting against it, a wish pertaining to the ego, even
though it is unconscious (i.e., preconscious).[24]
I will elucidate some of the foregoing observations by means of a dream of my own, and above all I will try to show how the dream-work deals
with a day-residue involving painful expectation:
Indistinct beginning. I tell my wife I have some news for her, something very special. She becomes frightened, and does not wish to hear it. I
assure her that on the contrary it is something which will please her greatly, and I begin to tell her that our son's Officers' Corps has sent a sum of
money (5,000 k.?)... something about honourable mention... distribution... at the same time I have gone with her into a sitting room, like a storeroom, in order to fetch something from it. Suddenly I see my son appear; he is not in uniform but rather in a tight-fitting sports suit (like a seal?)
with a small cap. He climbs on to a basket which stands to one side near a chest, in order to put something on this chest. I address him; no answer.
It seems to me that his face or forehead is bandaged, he arranges something in his mouth, pushing something into it. Also his hair shows a glint of
grey. I reflect: Can he be so exhausted? And has he false teeth? Before I can address him again I awake without anxiety, but with palpitations. My
clock points to 2.30 a.m.
To give a full analysis is once more impossible. I shall therefore confine myself to emphasizing some decisive points. Painful expectations of the
day had given occasion for this dream; once again there had been no news for over a week from my son, who was fighting at the Front. It is easy
to see that in the dream-content the conviction that he has been killed or wounded finds expression. At the beginning of the dream one can
observe an energetic effort to replace the painful thoughts by their contrary. I have to impart something very pleasing, something about sending
money, honourable mention, and distribution. (The sum of money originates in a gratifying incident of my medical practice; it is therefore trying
to lead the dream away altogether from its theme.) But this effort fails. The boy's mother has a presentiment of something terrible and does not
wish to listen. The disguises are too thin; the reference to the material to be suppressed shows through everywhere. If my son is killed, then his
comrades will send back his property; I shall have to distribute whatever he has left among his sisters, brothers and other people. Honourable
mention is frequently awarded to an officer after he has died the "hero's death." The dream thus strives to give direct expression to what it at first
wished to deny, whilst at the same time the wish-fulfilling tendency reveals itself by distortion. (The change of locality in the dream is no doubt
to be understood as threshold symbolism, in line with Silberer's view.) We have indeed no idea what lends it the requisite motive-power. But my
son does not appear as failing (on the field of battle) but climbing. - He was, in fact, a daring mountaineer. - He is not in uniform, but in a sports
suit; that is, the place of the fatality now dreaded has been taken by an accident which happened to him at one time when he was ski-running,
when he fell and fractured his thigh. But the nature of his costume, which makes him look like a seal, recalls immediately a younger person, our
comical little grandson; the grey hair recalls his father, our son-in-law, who has had a bad time in the War. What does this signify? But let us
leave this: the locality, a pantry, the chest, from which he wants to take something (in the dream, to put something on it), are unmistakable
allusions to an accident of my own, brought upon myself when I was between two and three years of age. I climbed on a foot-stool in the pantry,
in order to get something nice which was on a chest or table. The footstool tumbled over and its edge struck me behind the lower jaw. I might
very well have knocked all my teeth out. At this point, an admonition presents itself: it serves you right - like a hostile impulse against the valiant
warrior. A profounder analysis enables me to detect the hidden impulse, which would be able to find satisfaction in the dreaded mishap to my
son. It is the envy of youth which the elderly man believes that he has thoroughly stifled in actual life. There is no mistaking the fact that it was
the very intensity of the painful apprehension lest such a misfortune should really happen that searched out for its alleviation such a repressed
wish-fulfilment.
I can now clearly define what the unconscious wish means for the dream. I will admit that there is a whole class of dreams in which the
incitement originates mainly or even exclusively from the residues of the day; and returning to the dream about my friend Otto, I believe that
even my desire to become at last a professor extraordinarius would have allowed me to sleep in peace that night, had not the day's concern for my
friend's health continued active. But this worry alone would not have produced a dream; the motive-power needed by the dream had to be
contributed by a wish, and it was the business of my concern to find such a wish for itself, as the motive power of the dream. To put it
figuratively, it is quite possible that a day-thought plays the part of the entrepreneur in the dream; but the entrepreneur, who, as we say, has the 
idea, and feels impelled to realize it, can do nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who will defray the expense, and this capitalist, who
contributes the psychic expenditure for the dream, is invariably and indisputably, whatever the nature of the waking thoughts, a wish from the
unconscious.
In other cases the capitalist himself is the entrepreneur; this, indeed, seems to be the more usual case. An unconscious wish is excited by the day's
work, and this now creates the dream. And the dream-processes provide a parallel for all the other possibilities of the economic relationship here
used as an illustration. Thus the entrepreneur may himself contribute a little of the capital, or several entrepreneurs may seek the aid of the same
capitalist, or several capitalists may jointly supply the capital required by the entrepreneurs. Thus there are dreams sustained by more than one
dream-wish, and many similar variations, which may be readily imagined, and which are of no further interest to us. What is still lacking to our
discussion of the dream-wish we shall only be able to complete later on.
The tertium comparationis in the analogies here employed, the quantitative element of which an allotted amount is placed at the free disposal of
the dream, admits of a still closer application to the elucidation of the dream-structure. As shown in chapter VI., B., we can recognize in most
dreams a centre supplied with a special sensory intensity. This is, as a rule, the direct representation of the wish-fulfilment; for, if we reverse the
displacements of the dream-work, we find that the psychic intensity of the elements in the dream-thoughts is replaced by the sensory intensity of
the elements in the dream-content. The elements in the neighbourhood of the wish-fulfilment have often nothing to do with its meaning, but prove
to be the offshoots of painful thoughts which are opposed to the wish. But owing to their connection with the central element, often artificially
established, they secure so large a share of its intensity as to become capable of representation. Thus, the representative energy of the wishfulfilment diffuses itself over a certain sphere of association, within which all elements are raised to representation, including even those that are
in themselves without resources. In dreams containing several dynamic wishes we can easily separate and delimit the spheres of the individual
wish-fulfilments, and we shall find that the gaps in the dream are often of the nature of boundary-zones.
Although the foregoing remarks have restricted the significance of the day-residues for the dream, they are none the less deserving of some
further attention. For they must be a necessary ingredient in dream-formation, inasmuch as experience reveals the surprising fact that every dream
shows in its content a connection with a recent waking impression, often of the most indifferent kind. So far we have failed to understand the
necessity for this addition to the dream-mixture (chapter V., A.). This necessity becomes apparent only when we bear in mind the part played by
the unconscious wish, and seek further information in the psychology of the neuroses. We shall then learn that an unconscious idea, as such, is
quite incapable of entering into the preconscious, and that it can exert an influence there only by establishing touch with a harmless idea already
belonging to the preconscious, to which it transfers its intensity, and by which it allows itself to be screened. This is the fact of transference,
which furnishes the explanation of so many surprising occurrences in the psychic life of neurotics. The transference may leave the idea from the
preconscious unaltered, though the latter will thus acquire an unmerited intensity, or it may force upon this some modification derived from the
content of the transferred idea. I trust the reader will pardon my fondness for comparisons with daily life, but I feel tempted to say that the
situation for the repressed idea is like that of the American dentist in Austria, who may not carry on his practice unless he can get a duly installed
doctor of medicine to serve him as a signboard and legal "cover." Further, just as it is not exactly the busiest physicians who form such alliances
with dental practitioners, so in the psychic life the choice as regards covers for repressed ideas does not fall upon such preconscious or conscious
ideas as have themselves attracted enough of the attention active in the preconscious. The unconscious prefers to entangle with its connections
either those impressions and ideas of the preconscious which have remained unnoticed as being indifferent or those which have immediately had
attention withdrawn from them again (by rejection). it is a well-known proposition of the theory of associations, confirmed by all experience, that
ideas which have formed a very intimate connection in one direction assume a negative type of attitude towards whole groups of new
connections. I have even attempted at one time to base a theory of hysterical paralysis on this principle.
If we assume that the same need of transference on the part of the repressed ideas, of which we have become aware through the analysis of the
neurosis, makes itself felt in dreams also, we can at once explain two of the problems of the dream: namely, that every dream-analysis reveals an
interweaving of a recent impression, and that this recent element is often of the most indifferent character. We may add what we have already
learned elsewhere, that the reason why these recent and indifferent elements so frequently find their way into the dream-content as substitutes for
the very oldest elements of the dream-thoughts is that they have the least to fear from the resisting censorship. But while this freedom from
censorship explains only the preference shown to the trivial elements, the constant presence of recent elements points to the necessity for
transference. Both groups of impressions satisfy the demand of the repressed ideas for material still free from associations, the indifferent ones
because they have offered no occasion for extensive associations, and the recent ones because they have not had sufficient time to form such
associations.
We thus see that the day-residues, among which we may now include the indifferent impressions, not only borrow something from the Ucs when
they secure a share in dream-formation - namely, the motive-power at the disposal of the repressed wish - but they also offer to the unconscious
something that is indispensable to it, namely, the points of attachment necessary for transference. If we wished to penetrate more deeply into the
psychic processes, we should have to throw a clearer light on the play of excitations between the preconscious and the unconscious, and indeed
the study of the psychoneuroses would impel us to do so; but dreams, as it happens, give us no help in this respect.
Just one further remark as to the day-residues. There is no doubt that it is really these that disturb our sleep, and not our dreams which, on the
contrary, strive to guard our sleep. But we shall return to this point later. 
So far we have discussed the dream-wish; we have traced it back to the sphere of the Ucs, and have analysed its relation to the day-residues,
which, in their turn, may be either wishes, or psychic impulses of any other kind, or simply recent impressions. We have thus found room for the
claims that can be made for the dream-forming significance of our waking mental activity in all its multifariousness. It might even prove possible
to explain, on the basis of our train of thought, those extreme cases in which the dream, continuing the work of the day, brings to a happy issue an
unsolved problem of waking life. We merely lack a suitable example to analyse, in order to uncover the infantile or repressed source of wishes,
the tapping of which has so successfully reinforced the efforts of the preconscious activity. But we are not a step nearer to answering the question:
Why is it that the unconscious can furnish in sleep nothing more than the motive-power for a wish-fulfilment? The answer to this question must
elucidate the psychic nature of the state of wishing: and it will be given with the aid of the notion of the psychic apparatus.
We do not doubt that this apparatus, too, has only arrived at its present perfection by a long process of evolution. Let us attempt to restore it as it
existed in an earlier stage of capacity. From postulates to be confirmed in other ways, we know that at first the apparatus strove to keep itself as
free from stimulation as possible, and therefore, in its early structure, adopted the arrangement of a reflex apparatus, which enabled it promptly to
discharge by the motor paths any sensory excitation reaching it from without. But this simple function was disturbed by the exigencies of life, to
which the apparatus owes the impetus toward further development. The exigencies of life first confronted it in the form of the great physical
needs. The excitation aroused by the inner need seeks an outlet in motility, which we may describe as internal change or expression of the
emotions. The hungry child cries or struggles helplessly. But its situation remains unchanged; for the excitation proceeding from the inner need
has not the character of a momentary impact, but of a continuing pressure. A change can occur only if, in some way (in the case of the child by
external assistance), there is an experience of satisfaction, which puts an end to the internal excitation. An essential constituent of this experience
is the appearance of a certain percept (of food in our example), the memory-image of which is henceforth associated with the memory-trace of the
excitation arising from the need. Thanks to the established connection, there results, at the next occurrence of this need, a psychic impulse which
seeks to revive the memory-image of the former percept, and to re-evoke the former percept itself; that is, it actually seeks to re-establish the
situation of the first satisfaction. Such an impulse is what we call a wish; the reappearance of the perception constitutes the wish-fulfilment, and
the full cathexis of the perception, by the excitation springing from the need, constitutes the shortest path to the wish-fulfilment. We may assume
a primitive state of the psychic apparatus in which this path is actually followed, i.e., in which the wish ends in hallucination. This first psychic
activity therefore aims at an identity of perception: that is, at a repetition of that perception which is connected with the satisfaction of the need.
This primitive mental activity must have been modified by bitter practical experience into a secondary and more appropriate activity. The
establishment of identity of perception by the short regressive path within the apparatus does not produce the same result in another respect as
follows upon cathexis of the same perception coming from without. The satisfaction does not occur, and the need continues. In order to make the
internal cathexis equivalent to the external one, the former would have to be continuously sustained, just as actually happens in the hallucinatory
psychoses and in hunger-phantasies, which exhaust their performance in maintaining their hold on the object desired. In order to attain to more
appropriate use of the psychic energy, it becomes necessary to suspend the full regression, so that it does not proceed beyond the memory-image,
and thence can seek other paths, leading ultimately to the production of the desired identity from the side of the outer world.[25] This inhibition,
as well as the subsequent deflection of the excitation, becomes the task of a second system, which controls voluntary motility, i.e., a system
whose activity first leads on to the use of motility for purposes remembered in advance. But all this complicated mental activity, which works its
way from the memory-image to the production of identity of perception via the outer world, merely represents a roundabout way to wishfulfilment made necessary by experience.[26] Thinking is indeed nothing but a substitute for the hallucinatory wish; and if the dream is called a
wish-fulfilment, this becomes something self-evident, since nothing but a wish can impel our psychic apparatus to activity. The dream, which
fulfils its wishes by following the short regressive path, has thereby simply preserved for us a specimen of the primary method of operation of the
psychic apparatus, which has been abandoned as inappropriate. What once prevailed in the waking state, when our psychic life was still young
and inefficient, seems to have been banished into our nocturnal life; just as we still find in the nursery those discarded primitive weapons of adult
humanity, the bow and arrow. Dreaming is a fragment of the superseded psychic life of the child. In the psychoses, those modes of operation of
the psychic apparatus which are normally suppressed in the waking state reassert themselves, and thereupon betray their inability to satisfy our
demands in the outer world.[27]
The unconscious wish-impulses evidently strive to assert themselves even during the day, and the fact of transference, as well as the psychoses,
tells us that they endeavour to force their way through the preconscious system to consciousness and the command of motility. Thus, in the
censorship between Ucs and Pcs, which the dream forces us to assume, we must recognize and respect the guardian of our psychic health. But is it
not carelessness on the part of this guardian to diminish his vigilance at night, and to allow the suppressed impulses of the Ucs to achieve
expression, thus again making possible the process of hallucinatory regression? I think not, for when the critical guardian goes to rest - and we
have proof that his slumber is not profound - he takes care to close the gate to motility. No matter what impulses from the usually inhibited Ucs
may bustle about the stage, there is no need to interfere with them; they remain harmless, because they are not in a position to set in motion the
motor apparatus which alone can operate to produce any change in the outer world. Sleep guarantees the security of the fortress which has to be
guarded. The state of affairs is less harmless when a displacement of energies is produced, not by the decline at night in the energy put forth by
the critical censorship, but by the pathological enfeeblement of the latter, or the pathological reinforcement of the unconscious excitations, and
this while the preconscious is cathected and the gates of motility are open. The guardian is then overpowered; the unconscious excitations subdue
the Pcs, and from the Pcs they dominate our speech and action, or they enforce hallucinatory regressions, thus directing an apparatus not designed
for them by virtue of the attraction exerted by perceptions on the distribution of our psychic energy. We call this condition psychosis.
We now find ourselves in the most favourable position for continuing the construction of our psychological scaffolding, which we left after 
inserting the two systems, Ucs and Pcs. However, we still have reason to give further consideration to the wish as the sole psychic motive-power
in the dream. We have accepted the explanation that the reason why the dream is in every case a wish-fulfilment is that it is a function of the
system Ucs, which knows no other aim than wish-fulfilment, and which has at its disposal no forces other than the wish-impulses. Now if we
want to continue for a single moment longer to maintain our right to develop such far-reaching psychological speculations from the facts of dreaminterpretation, we are in duty bound to show that they insert the dream into a context which can also embrace other psychic structures. If there
exists a system of the Ucs - or something sufficiently analogous for the purposes of our discussion - the dream cannot be its sole manifestation;
every dream may be a wish-fulfilment, but there must be other forms of abnormal wish-fulfilment as well as dreams. And in fact the theory of all
psychoneurotic symptoms culminates in the one proposition that they, too, must be conceived as wish-fulfilments of the unconscious. [28] Our
explanation makes the dream only the first member of a series of the greatest importance for the psychiatrist, the understanding of which means
the solution of the purely psychological part of the psychiatric problem.[29] But in other members of this group of wish-fulfilments - for example,
in the hysterical symptoms - I know of one essential characteristic which I have so far failed to find in the dream. Thus, from the investigations
often alluded to in this treatise, I know that the formation of an hysterical symptom needs a junction of both the currents of our psychic life. The
symptom is not merely the expression of a realized unconscious wish; the latter must be joined by another wish from the preconscious, which is
fulfilled by the same symptom; so that the symptom is at least doubly determined, once by each of the conflicting systems. Just as in dreams,
there is no limit to further over-determination. The determination which does not derive from the Ucs is, as far as I can see, invariably a thoughtstream of reaction against the unconscious wish; for example, a self-punishment. Hence I can say, quite generally, that an hysterical symptom
originates only where two contrary wish-fulfilments, having their source in different psychic systems, are able to meet in a single expression.[30]
Examples would help us but little here, as nothing but a complete unveiling of the complications in question can carry conviction. I will therefore
content myself with the bare assertion, and will cite one example, not because it proves anything, but simply as an illustration. The hysterical
vomiting of a female patient proved, on the one hand, to be the fulfilment of an unconscious phantasy from the years of puberty - namely, the
wish that she might be continually pregnant, and have a multitude of children; and this was subsequently supplemented by the wish that she might
have them by as many fathers as possible. Against this immoderate wish there arose a powerful defensive reaction. But as by the vomiting the
patient might have spoilt her figure and her beauty, so that she would no longer find favour in any man's eyes, the symptom was also in keeping
with the punitive trend of thought, and so, being admissible on both sides, it was allowed to become a reality. This is the same way of acceding to
a wish-fulfilment as the queen of the Parthians was pleased to adopt in the case of the triumvir Crassus. Believing that he had undertaken his
campaign out of greed for gold, she caused molten gold to be poured into the throat of the corpse. "Here thou hast what thou hast longed for!"
Of the dream we know as yet only that it expresses a wish-fulfilment of the unconscious; and apparently the dominant preconscious system
permits this fulfilment when it has compelled the wish to undergo certain distortions. We are, moreover, not in fact in a position to demonstrate
regularly the presence of a train of thought opposed to the dream-wish, which is realized in the dream as well as its antagonist. Only now and then
have we found in dream-analyses signs of reaction-products as, for instance, my affection for my friend R in the dream of my uncle (chapter IV.).
But the contribution from the preconscious which is missing here may be found in another place. The dream can provide expression for a wish
from the Ucs by means of all sorts of distortions, once the dominant system has withdrawn itself into the wish to sleep, and has realized this wish
by producing the changes of cathexis within the psychic apparatus which are within its power; thereupon holding on to the wish in question for
the whole duration of sleep.[31]
Now this persistent wish to sleep on the part of the preconscious has a quite general facilitating effect on the formation of dreams. Let us recall
the dream of the father who, by the gleam of light from the death-chamber, was led to conclude that his child's body might have caught fire. We
have shown that one of the psychic forces decisive in causing the father to draw this conclusion in the dream instead of allowing himself to be
awakened by the gleam of light was the wish to prolong the life of the child seen in the dream by one moment. Other wishes originating in the
repressed have probably escaped us, for we are unable to analyse this dream. But as a second source of motive-power in this dream we may add
the father's desire to sleep, for, like the life of the child, the father's sleep is prolonged for a moment by the dream. The underlying motive is: "Let
the dream go on, or I must wake up." As in this dream, so in all others, the wish to sleep lends its support to the unconscious wish. In chapter III.
we cited dreams which were manifestly dreams of convenience. But in truth all dreams may claim this designation. The efficacy of the wish to go
on sleeping is most easily recognized in the awakening dreams, which so elaborate the external sensory stimulus that it becomes compatible with
the continuance of sleep; they weave it into a dream in order to rob it of any claims it might make as a reminder of the outer world. But this wish
to go on sleeping must also play its part in permitting all other dreams, which can only act as disturbers of the state of sleep from within. "Don't
worry; sleep on; it's only a dream," is in many cases the suggestion of the Pcs to consciousness when the dream gets too bad; and this describes in
a quite general way the attitude of our dominant psychic activity towards dreaming, even though the thought remains unuttered. I must draw the
conclusion that throughout the whole of our sleep we are just as certain that we are dreaming as we are certain that we are sleeping. It is
imperative to disregard the objection that our consciousness is never directed to the latter knowledge, and that it is directed to the former
knowledge only on special occasions, when the censorship feels, as it were, taken by surprise. On the contrary, there are persons in whom the
retention at night of the knowledge that they are sleeping and dreaming becomes quite manifest, and who are thus apparently endowed with the
conscious faculty of guiding their dream-life. Such a dreamer, for example, is dissatisfied with the turn taken by a dream; he breaks it off without
waking, and begins it afresh, in order to continue it along different lines, just like a popular author who, upon request, gives a happier ending to
his play. Or on another occasion, when the dream places him in a sexually exciting situation, he thinks in his sleep: "I don't want to continue this
dream and exhaust myself by an emission; I would rather save it for a real situation."
The Marquis Hervey (Vaschide) declared that he had gained such power over his dreams that he could accelerate their course at will, and turn
them in any direction he wished. It seems that in him the wish to sleep had accorded a place to another, a preconscious wish, the wish to observe 
his dreams and to derive pleasure from them. Sleep is just as compatible with such a wish-resolve as it is with some proviso as a condition of
waking up (wet-nurse's sleep), We know, too, that in all persons an interest in dreams greatly increases the number of dreams remembered after
waking.
Concerning other observations as to the guidance of dreams, Ferenczi states: "The dream takes the thought that happens to occupy our psychic
life at the moment, and elaborates it from all sides. It lets any given dream-picture drop when there is a danger that the wish-fulfilment will
miscarry, and attempts a new kind of solution, until it finally succeeds in creating a wish-fulfilment that satisfies in one compromise both
instances of the psychic life."
D. Waking Caused by Dreams - The Function of Dreams - The Anxiety Dream
Now that we know that throughout the night the preconscious is orientated to the wish to sleep, we can follow the dream-process with proper
understanding. But let us first summarize what we already know about this process. We have seen that day-residues are left over from the waking
activity of the mind, residues from which it has not been possible to withdraw all cathexis. Either one of the unconscious wishes has been aroused
through the waking activity during the day or it so happens that the two coincide; we have already discussed the multifarious possibilities. Either
already during the day or only on the establishment of the state of sleep the unconscious wish has made its way to the day-residues, and has
effected a transference to them. Thus there arises a wish transferred to recent material; or the suppressed recent wish is revived by a reinforcement
from the unconscious. This wish now endeavours to make its way to consciousness along the normal path of the thought processes, through the
preconscious, to which indeed it belongs by virtue of one of its constituent elements. It is, however, confronted by the censorship which still
subsists, and to whose influence it soon succumbs. It now takes on the distortion for which the way has already been paved by the transference to
recent material. So far it is on the way to becoming something resembling an obsession, a delusion, or the like, i.e., a thought reinforced by a
transference, and distorted in expression owing to the censorship. But its further progress is now checked by the state of sleep of the
preconscious; this system has presumably protected itself against invasion by diminishing its excitations. The dream-process, therefore, takes the
regressive course, which is just opened up by the peculiarity of the sleeping state, and in so doing follows the attraction exerted on it by memorygroups, which are, in part only, themselves present as visual cathexis, not as translations into the symbols of the later systems. On its way to
regression it acquires representability. The subject of compression will be discussed later. The dream-process has by this time covered the second
part of its contorted course. The first part threads its way progressively from the unconscious scenes or phantasies to the preconscious, while the
second part struggles back from the boundary of the censorship to the tract of the perceptions. But when the dream-process becomes a perceptioncontent, it has, so to speak, eluded the obstacle set up in the Pcs by the censorship and the sleeping state. It succeeds in drawing attention to itself,
and in being remarked by consciousness. For consciousness, which for us means a sense-organ for the apprehension of psychic qualities, can be
excited in waking life from two sources: firstly, from the periphery of the whole apparatus, the perceptive system; and secondly, from the
excitations of pleasure and pain which emerge as the sole psychic qualities yielded by the transpositions of energy in the interior of the apparatus.
All other processes in the Psi-systems, even those in the preconscious, are devoid of all psychic quality, and are therefore not objects of
consciousness, inasmuch as they do not provide either pleasure or pain for its perception. We shall have to assume that these releases of pleasure
and pain automatically regulate the course of the cathectic processes. But in order to make possible more delicate performances, it subsequently
proved necessary to render the flow of ideas more independent of pain-signals. To accomplish this, the Pcs system needed qualities of its own
which could attract consciousness, and most probably received them through the connection of the preconscious processes with the memorysystem of speech-symbols, which was not devoid of quality. Through the qualities of this system, consciousness, hitherto only a sense-organ for
perceptions, now becomes also a sense-organ for a part of our thought-processes. There are now, as it were, two sensory surfaces, one turned
toward perception and the other toward the preconscious thought-processes.
I must assume that the sensory surface of consciousness which is turned to the preconscious is rendered far more unexcitable by sleep than the
surface turned toward the P-system. The giving up of interest in the nocturnal thought-process is, of course, an appropriate procedure. Nothing is
to happen in thought; the preconscious wants to sleep. But once the dream becomes perception, it is capable of exciting consciousness through the
qualities now gained. The sensory excitation performs what is in fact its function; namely, it directs a part of the cathectic energy available in the
Pcs to the exciting cause in the form of attention. We must therefore admit that the dream always has a waking effect - that is, it calls into activity
part of the quiescent energy of the Pcs. Under the influence of this energy, it now undergoes the process which we have described as secondary
elaboration with a view to coherence and comprehensibility. This means that the dream is treated by this energy like any other perception-content;
it is subjected to the same anticipatory ideas as far, at least, as the material allows. As far as this third part of the dream-process has any direction,
this is once more progressive.
To avoid misunderstanding, it will not be amiss to say a few words as to the temporal characteristics of these dream-processes. In a very
interesting discussion, evidently suggested by Maury's puzzling guillotine dream, Goblot tries to demonstrate that a dream takes up no other time
than the transition period between sleeping and waking. The process of waking up requires time; during this time the dream occurs. It is supposed
that the final picture of the dream is so vivid that it forces the dreamer to wake; in reality it is so vivid only because when it appears the dreamer is
already very near waking. "Un reve, c'est un reveil qui commence."[32]
It has already been pointed out by Dugas that Goblot, in order to generalize his theory, was forced to ignore a great many facts. There are also
dreams from which we do not awaken; for example, many dreams in which we dream that we dream. From our knowledge of the dream-work, we 
can by no means admit that it extends only over the period of waking. On the contrary, we must consider it probable that the first part of the
dream-work is already begun during the day, when we are still under the domination of the preconscious. The second phase of the dream-work,
viz., the alteration by the censorship, the attraction exercised by unconscious scenes, and the penetration to perception, continues probably all
through the night, and accordingly we may always be correct when we report a feeling that we have been dreaming all night, even although we
cannot say what we have dreamed. I do not however, think that it is necessary to assume that up to the time of becoming conscious the dreamprocesses really follow the temporal sequence which we have described; viz., that there is first the transferred dream-wish, then the process of
distortion due to the censorship, and then the change of direction to regression, etc. We were obliged to construct such a sequence for the sake of
description; in reality, however, it is probably rather a question of simultaneously trying this path and that, and of the excitation fluctuating to and
fro, until finally, because it has attained the most apposite concentration, one particular grouping remains in the field. Certain personal
experiences even incline me to believe that the dream-work often requires more than one day and one night to produce its result, in which case the
extraordinary art manifested in the construction of the dream is shorn of its miraculous character. In my opinion, even the regard for the
comprehensibility of the dream as a perceptual event may exert its influence before the dream attracts consciousness to itself. From this point,
however, the process is accelerated, since the dream is henceforth subjected to the same treatment as any other perception. It is like fire works,
which require hours for their preparation and then flare up in a moment.
Through the dream-work, the dream-process now either gains sufficient intensity to attract consciousness to itself and to arouse the preconscious
(quite independently of the time or profundity of sleep), or its intensity is insufficient, and it must wait in readiness until attion, becoming more
alert immediately before waking, meets it half-way. Most dreams seem to operate with relatively slight psychic intensities, for they wait for the
process of waking. This, then, explains the fact that as a rule we perceive something dreamed if we are suddenly roused from a deep sleep. Here,
as well as in spontaneous waking, our first glance lights upon the perception-content created by the dream-work, while the next falls on that
provided by the outer world.
But of greater theoretical interest are those dreams which are capable of waking us in the midst of our sleep. We may bear in mind the
purposefulness which can be demonstrated in all other cases, and ask ourselves why the dream, that is, the unconscious wish, is granted the power
to disturb our sleep, i.e., the fulfilment of the preconscious wish. The explanation is probably to be found in certain relations of energy which we
do not yet understand. If we did so, we should probably find that the freedom given to the dream and the expenditure upon it of a certain detached
attention represent a saving of energy as against the alternative case of the unconscious having to be held in check at night just as it is during the
day. As experience shows, dreaming, even if it interrupts our sleep several times a night, still remains compatible with sleep. We wake up for a
moment, and immediately fall asleep again. It is like driving off a fly in our sleep; we awake ad hoc. When we fall asleep again we have removed
the cause of disturbance. The familiar examples of the sleep of wet-nurses, etc., show that the fulfilment of the wish to sleep is quite compatible
with the maintenance of a certain amount of attention in a given direction.
But we must here take note of an objection which is based on a greater knowledge of the unconscious processes. We have ourselves described the
unconscious wishes as always active, whilst nevertheless asserting that in the daytime they are not strong enough to make themselves perceptible.
But when the state of sleep supervenes, and the unconscious wish has shown its power to form a dream, and with it to awaken the preconscious,
why does this power lapse after cognizance has been taken of the dream? Would it not seem more probable that the dream should continually
renew itself, like the disturbing fly which, when driven away, takes pleasure in returning again and again? What justification have we for our
assertion that the dream removes the disturbance to sleep?
It is quite true that the unconscious wishes are always active. They represent paths which are always practicable, whenever a quantum of
excitation makes use of them. It is indeed an outstanding peculiarity of the unconscious processes that they are indestructible. Nothing can be
brought to an end in the unconscious; nothing is past or forgotten. This is impressed upon us emphatically in the study of the neuroses, and
especially of hysteria. The unconscious path of thought which leads to the discharge through an attack is forthwith passable again when there is a
sufficient accumulation of excitation. The mortification suffered thirty years ago operates, after having gained access to the unconscious sources
of affect, during all these thirty years as though it were a recent experience. Whenever its memory is touched, it revives, and shows itself to be
cathected with excitation which procures a motor discharge for itself in an attack. It is precisely here that psychotherapy must intervene, its task
being to ensure that the unconscious processes are settled and forgotten. Indeed, the fading of memories and the weak affect of impressions which
are no longer recent, which we are apt to take as self-evident, and to explain as a primary effect of time on our psychic memory-residues, are in
reality secondary changes brought about by laborious work. It is the preconscious that accomplishes this work; and the only course which
psychotherapy can pursue is to bring the Ucs under the dominion of the Pcs.
There are, therefore, two possible issues for any single unconscious excitation-process. Either it is left to itself, in which case it ultimately breaks
through somewhere and secures, on this one occasion, a discharge for its excitation into motility, or it succumbs to the influence of the
preconscious, and through this its excitation becomes bound instead of being discharged. It is the latter case that occurs in the dream-process. The
cathexis from the Pcs which goes to meet the dream once this has attained to perception, because it has been drawn thither by the excitation of
consciousness, binds the unconscious excitation of the dream and renders it harmless as a disturber of sleep. When the dreamer wakes up for a
moment, he has really chased away the fly that threatened to disturb his sleep. We may now begin to suspect that it is really more expedient and
economical to give way to the unconscious wish, to leave clear its path to regression so that and it may form a dream, and then to bind and
dispose of this dream by means of a small outlay of preconscious work, than to hold the unconscious in check throughout the whole period of
sleep. It was, indeed, to be expected that the dream, even if originally it was not a purposeful process, would have seized upon some definite 
function in the play of forces of the psychic life. We now see what this function is. The dream has taken over the task of bringing the excitation of
the Ucs, which had been left free, back under the domination of the preconscious; it thus discharges the excitation of the Ucs, acts as a safetyvalve for the latter, and at the same time, by a slight outlay of waking activity, secures the sleep of the preconscious. Thus, like the other psychic
formations of its group, the dream offers itself as a compromise, serving both systems simultaneously, by fulfilling the wishes of both, in so far as
they are mutually compatible. A glance at Robert's "elimination theory" will show that we must agree with this author on his main point, namely,
the determination of the function of dreams, though we differ from him in our general presuppositions and in our estimation of the dreamprocess.[33] -
But an obvious reflection must show us that this secondary function of the dream has no claim to recognition within the framework of any dreaminterpretation. Thinking ahead, making resolutions, sketching out attempted solutions which can then perhaps be realized in waking life - these
and many more performances are functions of the unconscious and preconscious activities of the mind which continue as day-residues in the
sleeping state, and can then combine with an unconscious wish to form a dream (chapter VII., C.). The function of thinking ahead in the dream is
thus rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the result of which may be disclosed to us by the analysis of dreams or other phenomena.
After the dream has so long been fused with its manifest content, one must now guard against confusing it with the latent dream-thoughts.
The above qualification - in so far as the two wishes are mutually compatible - contains a suggestion that there may be cases in which the function
of the dream fails. The dream-process is, to begin with, admitted as a wish-fulfilment of the unconscious, but if this attempted wish-fulfilment
disturbs the preconscious so profoundly that the latter can no longer maintain its state of rest, the dream has broken the compromise, and has
failed to perform the second part of its task. It is then at once broken off, and replaced by complete awakening. But even here it is not really the
fault of the dream if, though at other times the guardian, it has now to appear as the disturber of sleep, nor need this prejudice us against its
averred purposive character. This is not the only instance in the organism in which a contrivance that is usually to the purpose becomes
inappropriate and disturbing so soon as something is altered in the conditions which engender it; the disturbance, then, at all events serves the
new purpose of indicating the change, and of bringing into play against it the means of adjustment of the organism. Here, of course, I am thinking
of the anxiety-dream, and lest it should seem that I try to evade this witness against the theory of wish-fulfilment whenever I encounter it, I will at
least give some indications as to the explanation of the anxiety-dream.
That a psychic process which develops anxiety may still be a wish-fulfilment has long ceased to imply any contradiction for us. We may explain
this occurrence by the fact that the wish belongs to one system (the Ucs), whereas the other system (the Pcs) has rejected and suppressed it.[34]
The subjection of the Ucs by the Pcs is not thoroughgoing even in perfect psychic health; the extent of this suppression indicates the degree of our
psychic normality. Neurotic symptoms indicate to us that the two systems are in mutual conflict; the symptoms are the result of a compromise in
this conflict, and they temporarily put an end to it. On the one hand, they afford the Ucs a way out for the discharge of its excitation - they serve it
as a kind of sally-gate - while, on the other hand, they give the Pcs the possibility of dominating the Ucs in some degree. It is instructive to
consider, for example, the significance of a hysterical phobia, or of agoraphobia. A neurotic is said to be incapable of crossing the street alone,
and this we should rightly call a symptom. Let someone now remove this symptom by constraining him to this action which he deems himself
incapable of performing. The result will be an attack of anxiety, just as an attack of anxiety in the street has often been the exciting cause of the
establishment of an agoraphobia. We thus learn that the symptom has been constituted in order to prevent the anxiety from breaking out. The
phobia is thrown up before the anxiety like a frontier fortress.
We cannot enlarge further on this subject unless we examine the role of the affects in these processes, which can only be done here imperfectly.
We will therefore affirm the proposition that the principal reason why the suppression of the Ucs becomes necessary is that, if the movement of
ideas in the Ucs were allowed to run its course, it would develop an affect which originally had the character of pleasure, but which, since the
process of repression, bears the character of pain. The aim, as well as the result, of the suppression is to prevent the development of this pain. The
suppression extends to the idea-content of the Ucs, because the liberation of pain might emanate from this idea-content. We here take as our basis
a quite definite assumption as to the nature of the development of affect. This is regarded as a motor or secretory function, the key to the
innervation of which is to be found in the ideas of the Ucs. Through the domination of the Pcs these ideas are as it were strangled, that is,
inhibited from sending out the impulse that would develop the affect. The danger which arises, if cathexis by the Pcs ceases, thus consists in the
fact that the unconscious excitations would liberate an affect that - in consequence of the repression that has previously occurred - could only be
felt as pain or anxiety.
This danger is released if the dream-process is allowed to have its own way. The conditions for its realization are that repressions shall have
occurred, and that the suppressed wish-impulses can become sufficiently strong. They, therefore, fall entirely outside the psychological
framework of dream-formation. Were it not for the fact that our theme is connected by just one factor with the theme of the development of
anxiety, namely, by the setting free of the Ucs during sleep, I could refrain from the discussion of the anxiety-dream altogether, and thus avoid all
the obscurities involved in it.
The theory of the anxiety-dream belongs, as I have already repeatedly stated, to the psychology of the neuroses. I might further add that anxiety in
dreams is an anxiety-problem and not a dream-problem. Having once exhibited the point of contact of the psychology of the neuroses with the
theme of the dream-process, we have nothing further to do with it. There is only one thing left which I can do. Since I have asserted that neurotic
anxiety has its origin in sexual sources, I can subject anxiety-dreams to analysis in order to demonstrate the sexual material in their dreamthoughts. 
For good reasons, I refrain from citing any of the examples so abundantly placed at my disposal by neurotic patients, and prefer to give some
anxiety-dreams of children.
Personally, I have had no real anxiety-dream for decades, but I do recall one from my seventh or eighth year which I subjected to interpretation
some thirty years later. The dream was very vivid, and showed me my beloved mother, with a peculiarly calm, sleeping countenance, carried into
the room and laid on the bed by two (or three) persons with birds' beaks. I awoke crying and screaming, and disturbed my parents' sleep. The
peculiarly draped, excessively tall figures with beaks I had taken from the illustrations of Philippson's Bible; I believe they represented deities
with the heads of sparrowhawks from an Egyptian tomb-relief. The analysis yielded, however, also the recollection of a house-porter's boy, who
used to play with us children on a meadow in front of the house; I might add that his name was Philip. It seemed to me then that I first heard from
this boy the vulgar word signifying sexual intercourse, which is replaced among educated persons by the Latin word coitus, but which the dream
plainly enough indicates by the choice of the birds' heads. I must have guessed the sexual significance of the word from the look of my worldlywise teacher. My mother's expression in the dream was copied from the countenance of my grandfather, whom I had seen a few days before his
death snoring in a state of coma. The interpretation of the secondary elaboration in the dream must therefore have been that my mother was
dying; the tomb-relief, too, agrees with this. I awoke with this anxiety, and could not calm myself until I had waked my parents. I remember that I
suddenly became calm when I saw my mother; it was as though I had needed the assurance: then she was not dead. But this secondary
interpretation of the dream had only taken place when the influence of the developed anxiety was already at work. I was not in a state of anxiety
because I had dreamt that my mother was dying; I interpreted the dream in this manner in the preconscious elaboration because I was already
under the domination of the anxiety. The latter, however, could be traced back, through the repression to a dark, plainly sexual craving, which had
found appropriate expression in the visual content of the dream.
A man twenty-seven years of age, who had been seriously ill for a year, had repeatedly dreamed, between the ages of eleven and thirteen, dreams
attended with great anxiety, to the effect that a man with a hatchet was running after him; he wanted to run away, but seemed to be paralysed, and
could not move from the spot. This may be taken as a good and typical example of a very common anxiety-dream, free from any suspicion of a
sexual meaning. In the analysis, the dreamer first thought of a story told him by his uncle (chronologically later than the dream), viz., that he was
attacked at night in the street by a suspicious-looking individual; and he concluded from this association that he might have heard of a similar
episode at the time of the dream. In association with the hatchet, he recalled that during this period of his life he once hurt his hand with a hatchet
while chopping wood. This immediately reminded him of his relations with his younger brother, whom he used to maltreat and knock down. He
recalled, in particular, one occasion when he hit his brother's head with his boot and made it bleed, and his mother said: "I'm afraid he will kill
him one day." While he seemed to be thus held by the theme of violence, a memory from his ninth year suddenly emerged. His parents had come
home late and had gone to bed, whilst he was pretending to be asleep. He soon heard panting, and other sounds that seemed to him mysterious,
and he could also guess the position of his parents in bed. His further thoughts showed that he had established an analogy between this relation
between his parents and his own relation to his younger brother. He subsumed what was happening between his parents under the notion of "an
act of violence and a fight." The fact that he had frequently noticed blood in his mother's bed corroborated this conception.
That the sexual intercourse of adults appears strange and alarming to children who observe it, and arouses anxiety in them, is, I may say, a fact
established by everyday experience. I have explained this anxiety on the ground that we have here a sexual excitation which is not mastered by
the child's understanding, and which probably also encounters repulsion because their parents are involved, and is therefore transformed into
anxiety. At a still earlier period of life the sexual impulse towards the parent of opposite sex does not yet suffer repression, but as we have seen
(chapter V., D.) expresses itself freely.
For the night terrors with hallucinations (pavor nocturnus) so frequent in children I should without hesitation offer the same explanation. These,
too, can only be due to misunderstood and rejected sexual impulses which, if recorded, would probably show a temporal periodicity, since an
intensification of sexual libido may equally be produced by accidentally exciting impressions and by spontaneous periodic processes of
development.
I have not the necessary observational material for the full demonstration of this explanation.[35] On the other hand, pediatrists seem to lack the
point of view which alone makes intelligible the whole series of phenomena, both from the somatic and from the psychic side. To illustrate by a
comical example how closely, if one is made blind by the blinkers of medical mythology, one may pass by the understanding of such cases, I will
cite a case which I found in a thesis on pavor nocturnus (Debacker, 1881, p. 66).
A boy of thirteen, in delicate health, began to be anxious and dreamy; his sleep became uneasy, and once almost every week it was interrupted by
an acute attack of anxiety with hallucinations. The memory of these dreams was always very distinct. Thus he was able to relate that the devil had
shouted at him: "Now we have you, now we have you!" and then there was a smell of pitch and brimstone, and the fire burned his skin. From this
dream he woke in terror; at first he could not cry out; then his voice came back to him, and he was distinctly heard to say: "No, no, not me; I
haven't done anything," or: "Please, don't; I will never do it again!" At other times he said: "Albert has never done that!" Later he avoided
undressing, "because the fire attacked him only when he was undressed." In the midst of these evil dreams, which were endangering his health, he
was sent into the country, where he recovered in the course of eighteen months. At the age of fifteen he confessed one day: "Je n'osais pas
l'avouer, mais j'eprouvais continuellement des picotements et des surexcitations aux parties;[36] a la fin, cela m'enervait tant que plusieurs fois j'ai 
pense me jeter par la fenetre du dortoir."[37]
It is, of course, not difficult to guess: 1. That the boy had practised masturbation in former years, that he had probably denied it, and was
threatened with severe punishment for his bad habit (His confession: Je ne le ferai plus;[38] his denial: Albert n'a jamais fait ca.)[39] 2. That,
under the advancing pressure of puberty, the temptation to masturbate was re-awakened through the titillation of the genitals. 3. That now,
however, there arose within him a struggle for repression, which suppressed the libido and transformed it into anxiety, and that this anxiety now
gathered up the punishments with which he was originally threatened.
Let us, on the other hand, see what conclusions were drawn by the author (p. 69):
"1. It is clear from this observation that the influence of puberty may produce in a boy of delicate health a condition of extreme weakness, and
that this may lead to a very marked cerebral anaemia.[40]
"2. This cerebral anaemia produces an alteration of character, demono-maniacal hallucinations, and very violent nocturnal, and perhaps also
diurnal, states of anxiety.
"3. The demonomania and the self-reproaches of the boy can be traced to the influences of a religious education which had acted upon him as a
child.
"4. All manifestations disappeared as a result of a lengthy sojourn in the country, bodily exercise, and the return of physical strength after the
termination of puberty.
"5. Possibly an influence predisposing to the development of the boy's cerebral state may be attributed to heredity and to the father's former
syphilis."
Then finally come the concluding remarks: "Nous avons fait entrer cette observation dans le cadre delires apyretiques d'inanition, car c'est a
l'ischemie cerebrale que nous rattachons cet etat particulier."[41]

In attempting to penetrate more profoundly into the psychology of the dream-processes, I have undertaken a difficult task, to which, indeed, my
powers of exposition are hardly adequate. To reproduce the simultaneity of so complicated a scheme in terms of a successive description, and at
the same time to make each part appear free from all assumptions, goes fairly beyond my powers. I have now to atone for the fact that in my
exposition of the psychology of dreams I have been unable to follow the historic development of my own insight. The lines of approach to the
comprehension of the dream were laid down for me by previous investigations into the psychology of the neuroses, to which I should not refer
here, although I am constantly obliged to do so; whereas I should like to work in the opposite direction, starting from the dream, and then
proceeding to establish its junction with the psychology of the neuroses. I am conscious of all the difficulties which this involves for the reader,
but I know of no way to avoid them.
Since I am dissatisfied with this state of affairs, I am glad to dwell upon another point of view, which would seem to enhance the value of my
efforts. As was shown in the introductory section, I found myself confronted with a theme which had been marked by the sharpest contradictions
on the part of those who had written on it. In the course of our treatment of the problems of the dream, room has been found for most of these
contradictory views. We have been compelled to take decided exception to two only of the views expressed: namely, that the dream is a
meaningless process, and that it is a somatic process. Apart from these, we have been able to find a place for the truth of all the contradictory
opinions at one point or another of the complicated tissue of the facts, and we have been able to show that each expressed something genuine and
correct. That our dreams continue the impulses and interests of waking life has been generally confirmed by the discovery of the hidden dreamthoughts. These concern themselves only with things that seem to us important and of great interest. Dreams never occupy themselves with trifles.
But we have accepted also the opposite view, namely, that the dream gathers up the indifferent residues of the day, and cannot seize upon any
important interest of the day until it has in some measure withdrawn itself from waking activity. We have found that this holds true of the dreamcontent, which by means of distortion gives the dream-thought an altered expression. We have said that the dream-process, owing to the nature of
the mechanism of association, finds it easier to obtain possession of recent or indifferent material, which has not yet been put under an embargo
by our waking mental activity; and that, on account of the censorship, it transfers the psychic intensity of the significant but also objectionable
material to the indifferent. The hypermnesia of the dream and its ability to dispose of infantile material have become the main foundations of our
doctrine; in our theory of dreams we have assigned to a wish of infantile origin the part of the indispensable motive-power of dream-formation. It
has not, of course, occurred to us to doubt the experimentally demonstrated significance of external sensory stimuli during sleep; but we have
placed this material in the same relation to the dream-wish as the thought-residues left over from our waking activity. We need not dispute the
fact that the dream interprets objective sensory stimuli after the manner of an illusion; but we have supplied the motive for this interpretation,
which has been left indeterminate by other writers. The interpretation proceeds in such a way that the perceived object is rendered harmless as a 
source of disturbance of sleep, whilst it is made usable for the wish-fulfilment. Though we do not admit as a special source of dreams the
subjective state of excitation of the sensory organs during sleep (which seems to have been demonstrated by Trumbull Ladd), we are,
nevertheless, able to explain this state of excitation by the regressive revival of the memories active behind the dream. As to the internal organic
sensations, which are wont to be taken as the cardinal point of the explanation of dreams, these, too, find a place in our conception, though indeed
a more modest one. These sensations - the sensations of falling, of soaring, or of being inhibited - represent an ever-ready material, which the
dream-work can employ to express the dream-thought as often as need arises.
That the dream-process is a rapid and momentary one is, we believe, true as regards the perception by consciousness of the preformed dreamcontent; but we have found that the preceding portions of the dream-process probably follow a slow, fluctuating course. As for the riddle of the
superabundant dream-content compressed into the briefest moment of time, we have been able to contribute the explanation that the dream seizes
upon ready-made formations of the psychic life. We have found that it is true that dreams are distorted and mutilated by the memory, but that this
fact presents no difficulties, as it is only the last manifest portion of a process of distortion which has been going on from the very beginning of
the dream-work. In the embittered controversy, which has seemed irreconcilable, whether the psychic life is asleep at night, or can make the same
use of all its faculties as during the day, we have been able to conclude that both sides are right, but that neither is entirely so. In the dreamthoughts we found evidence of a highly complicated intellectual activity, operating with almost all the resources of the psychic apparatus; yet it
cannot be denied that these dream-thoughts have originated during the day, and it is indispensable to assume that there is a sleeping state of the
psychic life. Thus, even the doctrine of partial sleep received its due, but we have found the characteristic feature of the sleeping state not in the
disintegration of the psychic system of connections, but in the special attitude adopted by the psychic system which is dominant during the day -
the attitude of the wish to sleep. The deflection from the outer world retains its significance for our view, too; though not the only factor at work,
it helps to make possible the regressive course of the dream-representation. The abandonment of voluntary guidance of the flow of ideas is
incontestable; but psychic life does not thereby become aimless, for we have seen that upon relinquishment of the voluntary directing ideas,
involuntary ones take charge. On the other hand, we have not only recognized the loose associative connection of the dream, but have brought a
far greater area within the scope of this kind of connection than could have been suspected; we have, however, found it merely an enforced
substitute for another, a correct and significant type of association. To be sure, we too have called the dream absurd, but examples have shown us
how wise the dream is when it simulates absurdity. As regards the functions that have been attributed to the dream, we are able to accept them all.
That the dream relieves the mind, like a safety-valve, and that, as Robert has put it, all kinds of harmful material are rendered harmless by
representation in the dream, not only coincides exactly with our own theory of the twofold wish-fulfilment in the dream, but in its very wording
becomes more intelligible for us than it is for Robert himself. The free indulgence of the psyche in the play of its faculties is reproduced in our
theory as the non-interference of the preconscious activity with the dream. The return of the embryonal standpoint of psychic life in the dream,
and Havelock Ellis's remark that the dream is "an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect thoughts," appear to us as happy anticipations of
our own exposition, which asserts that primitive modes of operations that are suppressed during the day play a part in the formation of dreams.
We can fully identify ourselves with Sully's statement, that "our dreams bring back again our earlier and successively developed personalities, our
old ways of regarding things, with impulses and modes of reaction which ruled us long ago"; and for us, as for Delage, the suppressed material
becomes the mainspring of the dream.
We have fully accepted the role that Scherner ascribes to the dream-phantasy, and his own interpretations, but we have been obliged to transpose
them, as it were, to another part of the problem. It is not the dream that creates the phantasy, but the activity of unconscious phantasy that plays
the leading part in the formation of the dream-thoughts. We remain indebted to Scherner for directing us to the source of the dream-thoughts, but
almost everything that he ascribes to the dream-work is attributable to the activity of the unconscious during the day, which instigates dreams no
less than neurotic symptoms. The dream-work we had to separate from this activity as something quite different and far more closely controlled.
Finally, we have by no means renounced the relation of the dream to psychic disturbances, but have given it, on new ground, a more solid
foundation.
Held together by the new features in our theory as by a superior unity, we find the most varied and most contradictory conclusions of other
writers fitting into our structure; many of them are given a different turn, but only a few of them are wholly rejected. But our own structure is still
unfinished. For apart from the many obscure questions in which we have involved ourselves by our advance into the dark regions of psychology,
we are now, it would seem, embarrassed by a new contradiction. On the one hand, we have made it appear that the dream-thoughts proceed from
perfectly normal psychic activities, but on the other hand we have found among the dream-thoughts a number of entirely abnormal mental
processes, which extend also to the dream-content, and which we reproduce in the interpretation of the dream. All that we have termed the dreamwork seems to depart so completely from the psychic processes which we recognize as correct and appropriate that the severest judgments
expressed by the writers mentioned as to the low level of psychic achievement of dreams must appear well founded.
Here, perhaps, only further investigations can provide an explanation and set us on the right path. Let me pick out for renewed attention one of the
constellations which lead to dream-formation.
We have learned that the dream serves as a substitute for a number of thoughts derived from our daily life, and which fit together with perfect
logic. We cannot, therefore, doubt that these thoughts have their own origin in our normal mental life. All the qualities which we value in our
thought-processes, and which mark them out as complicated performances of a high order, we shall find repeated in the dream-thoughts. There is,
however, no need to assume that this mental work is performed during sleep; such an assumption would badly confuse the conception of the
psychic state of sleep to which we have hitherto adhered. On the contrary, these thoughts may very well have their origin in the daytime, and, 
unremarked by our consciousness, may have gone on from their first stimulus until, at the onset of sleep, they have reached completion. If we are
to conclude anything from this state of affairs, it can only be that it proves that the most complex mental operations are possible without the
cooperation of consciousness - a truth which we have had to learn anyhow from every psycho-analysis of a patient suffering from hysteria or
obsessions. These dream-thoughts are certainly not in themselves incapable of consciousness; if we have not become conscious of them during
the day, this may have been due to various reasons. The act of becoming conscious depends upon a definite psychic function - attention - being
brought to bear. This seems to be available only in a determinate quantity, which may have been diverted from the train of thought in question by
other aims. Another way in which such trains of thought may be withheld from consciousness is the following: From our conscious reflection we
know that, when applying our attention, we follow a particular course. But if that course leads us to an idea which cannot withstand criticism, we
break off and allow the cathexis of attention to drop. Now, it would seem that the train of thought thus started and abandoned may continue to
develop without our attention returning to it, unless at some point it attains a specially high intensity which compels attention. An initial
conscious rejection by our judgment, on the ground of incorrectness or uselessness for the immediate purpose of the act of thought, may,
therefore, be the cause of a thought-process going on unnoticed by consciousness until the onset of sleep.
Let us now recapitulate: We call such a train of thought a preconscious train, and we believe it to be perfectly correct, and that it may equally well
be a merely neglected train or one that has been interrupted and suppressed. Let us also state in plain terms how we visualize the movement of our
thought. We believe that a certain quantity of excitation, which we call cathectic energy, is displaced from a purposive idea along the association
paths selected by this directing idea. A neglected train of thought has received no such cathexis, and the cathexis has been withdrawn from one
that was suppressed or rejected; both have thus been left to their own excitations. The train of thought cathected by some aim becomes able under
certain conditions to attract the attention of consciousness, and by the mediation of consciousness it then receives hyper-cathexis. We shall be
obliged presently to elucidate our assumptions as to the nature and function of consciousness.
A train of thought thus incited in the Pcs may either disappear spontaneously, or it may continue. The former eventuality we conceive as follows:
it diffuses its energy through all the association paths emanating from it, and throws the entire chain of thoughts into a state of excitation, which
continues for a while, and then subsides, through the excitation which had called for discharge being transformed into dormant cathexis. If this
first eventuality occurs, the process has no further significance for dream-formation. But other directing ideas are lurking in our preconscious,
which have their source in our unconscious and ever-active wishes. These may gain control of the excitation in the circle of thoughts thus left to
itself, establish a connection between it and the unconscious wish, and transfer to it the energy inherent in the unconscious wish. Henceforth the
neglected or suppressed train of thought is in a position to maintain itself, although this reinforcement gives it no claim to access to
consciousness. We may say, then, that the hitherto preconscious train of thought has been drawn into the unconscious.
Other constellations leading to dream-formation might be as follows: The preconscious train of thought might have been connected from the
beginning with the unconscious wish, and for that reason might have met with rejection by the dominating aim - cathexis. Or an unconscious wish
might become active for other (possibly somatic) reasons, and of its own accord seek a transference to the psychic residues not cathected by the
Pcs. All three cases have the same result: there is established in the preconscious a train of thought which, having been abandoned by the
preconscious cathexis, has acquired cathexis from the unconscious wish.
From this point onward the train of thought is subjected to a series of transformations which we no longer recognize as normal psychic processes,
and which give a result that we find strange, a psychopathological formation. Let us now emphasize and bring together these transformations:
1. The intensities of the individual ideas become capable of discharge in their entirety, and pass from one idea to another, so that individual ideas
are formed which are endowed with great intensity. Through the repeated occurrence of this process, the intensity of an entire train of thought
may ultimately be concentrated in a single conceptual unit. This is the fact of compression or condensation with which we become acquainted
when investigating the dream-work. It is condensation that is mainly responsible for the strange impression produced by dreams, for we know of
nothing analogous to it in the normal psychic life that is accessible to consciousness. We get here, too, ideas which are of great psychic
significance as nodal points or as end-results of whole chains of thought, but this value is not expressed by any character actually manifest for our
internal perception; what is represented in it is not in any way made more intensive. In the process of condensation the whole set of psychic
connections becomes transformed into the intensity of the idea-content. The situation is the same as when, in the case of a book, I italicize or print
in heavy type any word to which I attach outstanding value for the understanding of the text. In speech, I should pronounce the same word loudly,
and deliberately, and with emphasis. The first simile points immediately to one of the examples which were given of the dream-work
(trimethylamine in the dream of Irma's injection). Historians of art call our attention to the fact that the most ancient sculptures known to history
follow a similar principle, in expressing the rank of the persons represented by the size of the statues. The king is made two or three times as tall
as his retinue or his vanquished enemies. But a work of art of the Roman period makes use of more subtle means to accomplish the same end. The
figure of the Emperor is placed in the centre, erect and in his full height, and special care is bestowed on the modelling of this figure; his enemies
are seen cowering at his feet; but he is no longer made to seem a giant among dwarfs. At the same time, in the bowing of the subordinate to his
superior, even in our own day, we have an echo of this ancient principle of representation.
The direction followed by the condensations of the dream is prescribed on the one hand by the true preconscious relations of the dream-thoughts,
and, on the other hand, by the attraction of the visual memories in the unconscious. The success of the condensation-work produces those
intensities which are required for penetration to the perception-system. 
2. By the free transference of intensities, and in the service of the condensation, intermediary ideas - compromises, as it were - are formed (cf. the
numerous examples). This, also, is something unheard of in the normal movement of our ideas, where what is of most importance is the selection
and the retention of the right conceptual material. On the other hand, composite and compromise formations occur with extraordinary frequency
when we are trying to find verbal expression for preconscious thoughts; these are considered slips of the tongue.
3. The ideas which transfer their intensities to one another are very loosely connected, and are joined together by such forms of association as are
disdained by our serious thinking, and left to be exploited solely by wit. In particular, assonances and punning associations are treated as equal in
value to any other associations.
4. Contradictory thoughts do not try to eliminate one another, but continue side by side, and often combine to form condensation-products, as
though no contradiction existed; or they form compromises for which we should never forgive our thought, but which we frequently sanction in
our action.
These are some of the most conspicuous abnormal processes to which the dream-thoughts which have previously been rationally formed are
subjected in the course of the dream-work. As the main feature of these processes, we may see that the greatest importance is attached to
rendering the cathecting energy mobile and capable of discharge; the content and the intrinsic significance of the psychic elements to which these
cathexes adhere become matters of secondary importance. One might perhaps assume that condensation and compromise-formation are effected
only in the service of regression, when the occasion arises for changing thoughts into images. But the analysis - and still more plainly the
synthesis - of such dreams as show no regression towards images, e.g., the dream Autodidasker: Conversation with Professor N, reveals the same
processes of displacement and condensation as do the rest.
We cannot, therefore, avoid the conclusion that two kinds of essentially different psychic processes participate in dream-formation; one forms
perfectly correct and fitting dream-thoughts, equivalent to the results of normal thinking, while the other deals with these thoughts in a most
astonishing and, as it seems, incorrect way. The latter process we have already set apart in chapter VI as the dream-work proper. What can we say
now as to the derivation of this psychic process?
It would be impossible to answer this question here if we had not penetrated a considerable way into the psychology of the neuroses, and
especially of hysteria. From this, however, we learn that the same "incorrect" psychic processes - as well as others not enumerated - control the
production of hysterical symptoms. In hysteria, too, we find at first a series of perfectly correct and fitting thoughts, equivalent to our conscious
ones, of whose existence in this form we can, however, learn nothing, i.e., which we can only subsequently reconstruct. If they have forced their
way anywhere to perception, we discover from the analysis of the symptom formed that these normal thoughts have been subjected to abnormal
treatment, and that by means of condensation and compromise-formation, through superficial associations which cover up contradictions, and
eventually along the path of regression, they have been conveyed into the symptom. In view of the complete identity between the peculiarities of
the dream-work and those of the psychic activity which issues in psychoneurotic symptoms, we shall feel justified in transferring to the dream the
conclusions urged upon us by hysteria.
From the theory of hysteria we borrow the proposition that such an abnormal psychic elaboration of a normal train of thought takes place only
when the latter has been used for the transference of an unconscious wish which dares from the infantile life and is in a state of repression.
Complying with this proposition, we have built up the theory of the dream on the assumption that the actuating dream-wish invariably originates
in the unconscious; which, as we have ourselves admitted, cannot be universally demonstrated, even though it cannot be refuted. But in order to
enable us to say just what repression is, after employing this term so freely, we shall be obliged to make a further addition to our psychological
scaffolding.
We had elaborated the fiction of a primitive psychic apparatus, the work of which is regulated by the effort to avoid accumulation of excitation,
and as far as possible to maintain itself free from excitation. For this reason it was constructed after the plan of a reflex apparatus; motility, in the
first place as the path to changes within the body, was the channel of discharge at its disposal. We then discussed the psychic results of
experiences of gratification, and were able at this point to introduce a second assumption, namely, that the accumulation of excitation - by
processes that do not concern us here - is felt as pain, and sets the apparatus in operation in order to bring about again a state of gratification, in
which the diminution of excitation is perceived as pleasure. Such a current in the apparatus, issuing from pain and striving for pleasure, we call a
wish. We have said that nothing but a wish is capable of setting the apparatus in motion and that the course of any excitation in the apparatus is
regulated automatically by the perception of pleasure and pain. The first occurrence of wishing may well have taken the form of a hallucinatory
cathexis of the memory of gratification. But this hallucination, unless it could be maintained to the point of exhaustion, proved incapable of
bringing about a cessation of the need, and consequently of securing the pleasure connected with gratification.
Thus, there was required a second activity - in our terminology the activity of a second system - which would not allow the memory-cathexis to
force its way to perception and thence to bind the psychic forces, but would lead the excitation emanating from the need-stimulus by a detour,
which by means of voluntary motility would ultimately so change the outer world as to permit the real perception of the gratifying object. Thus
far we have already elaborated the scheme of the psychic apparatus; these two systems are the germ of what we set up in the fully developed
apparatus as the Ucs and Pcs. 
To change the outer world appropriately by means of motility requires the accumulation of a large total of experiences in the memory-systems, as
well as a manifold consolidation of the relations which are evoked in this memory-material by various directing ideas. We will now proceed
further with our assumptions. The activity of the second system, groping in many directions, tentatively sending forth cathexes and retracting
them, needs on the one hand full command over all memory-material, but on the other hand it would be a superfluous expenditure of energy were
it to send along the individual thought-paths large quantities of cathexis, which would then flow away to no purpose and thus diminish the
quantity needed for changing the outer world. Out of a regard for purposiveness, therefore, I postulate that the second system succeeds in
maintaining the greater part of the energic cathexes in a state of rest, and in using only a small portion for its operations of displacement. The
mechanics of these processes is entirely unknown to me; anyone who seriously wishes to follow up these ideas must address himself to the
physical analogies, and find some way of getting a picture of the sequence of motions which ensues on the excitation of the neurones. Here I do
no more than hold fast to the idea that the activity of the first Psi-system aims at the free outflow of the quantities of excitation, and that the
second system, by means of the cathexes emanating from it, effects an inhibition of this outflow, a transformation into dormant cathexis, probably
with a rise of potential. I therefore assume that the course taken by any excitation under the control of the second system is bound to quite
different mechanical conditions from those which obtain under the control of the first system. After the second system has completed its work of
experimental thought, it removes the inhibition and damming up of the excitations and allows them to flow off into motility.
An interesting train of thought now presents itself if we consider the relations of this inhibition of discharge by the second system to the process
of regulation by the pain-principle. Let us now seek out the counterpart of the primary experience of gratification, namely, the objective
experience of fear. Let a perception-stimulus act on the primitive apparatus and be the source of a pain-excitation. There will then ensue
uncoordinated motor manifestations, which will go on until one of these withdraws the apparatus from perception, and at the same time from the
pain. On the reappearance of the percept this manifestation will immediately be repeated (perhaps as a movement of flight), until the percept has
again disappeared. But in this case no tendency will remain to recathect the perception of the source of pain by hallucination or otherwise. On the
contrary, there will be a tendency in the primary apparatus to turn away again from this painful memory-image immediately if it is in any way
awakened, since the overflow of its excitation into perception would, of course, evoke (or more precisely, begin to evoke) pain. This turning away
from a recollection, which is merely a repetition of the former flight from perception, is also facilitated by the fact that, unlike the perception, the
recollection has not enough quality to arouse consciousness, and thereby to attract fresh cathexis. This effortless and regular turning away of the
psychic process from the memory of anything that had once been painful gives us the prototype and the first example of psychic repression. We
all know how much of this turning away from the painful, the tactics of the ostrich, may still be shown as present even in the normal psychic life
of adults.
In obedience to the pain-principle, therefore, the first Psi-system is quite incapable of introducing anything unpleasant into the thought-nexus. The
system cannot do anything but wish. If this were to remain so, the activity of thought of the second system, which needs to have at its disposal all
the memories stored up by experience, would be obstructed. But two paths are now open: either the work of the second system frees itself
completely from the pain-principle, and continues its course, paying no heed to the pain attached to given memories, or it contrives to cathect the
memory of the pain in such a manner as to preclude the liberation of pain. We can reject the first possibility, as the pain-principle also proves to
act as a regulator of the cycle of excitation in the second system; we are therefore thrown back upon the second possibility, namely, that this
system cathects a memory in such a manner as to inhibit any outflow of excitation from it, and hence, also, the outflow, comparable to a motorinnervation, needed for the development of pain. And thus, setting out from two different starting-points, i.e., from regard for the pain-principle,
and from the principle of the least expenditure of innervation, we are led to the hypothesis that cathexis through the second system is at the same
time an inhibition of the discharge of excitation. Let us, however, keep a close hold on the fact - for this is the key to the theory of repression -
that the second system can only cathect an idea when it is in a position to inhibit any pain emanating from this idea. Anything that withdrew itself
from this inhibition would also remain inaccessible for the second system, i.e., would immediately be given up by virtue of the pain-principle.
The inhibition of pain, however, need not be complete; it must be permitted to begin, since this indicates to the second system the nature of the
memory, and possibly its lack of fitness for the purpose sought by the process of thought.
The psychic process which is alone tolerated by the first system I shall now call the primary process; and that which results under the inhibiting
action of the second system I shall call the secondary process. I can also show at another point for what purpose the second system is obliged to
correct the primary process. The primary process strives for discharge of the excitation in order to establish with the quantity of excitation thus
collected an identity of perception; the secondary process has abandoned this intention, and has adopted instead the aim of an identity of thought.
All thinking is merely a detour from the memory of gratification (taken as a purposive idea) to the identical cathexis of the same memory, which
is to be reached once more by the path of motor experiences. Thought must concern itself with the connecting-paths between ideas without
allowing itself to be misled by their intensities. But it is obvious that condensations of ideas and intermediate or compromise-formations are
obstacles to the attainment of the identity which is aimed at; by substituting one idea for another they swerve away from the path which would
have led onward from the first idea. Such procedures are, therefore, carefully avoided in our secondary thinking. It will readily be seen, moreover,
that the pain-principle, although at other times it provides the thought-process with its most important clues, may also put difficulties in its way in
the pursuit of identity of thought. Hence, the tendency of the thinking process must always be to free itself more and more from exclusive
regulation by the pain-principle, and to restrict the development of affect through the work of thought to the very minimum which remains
effective as a signal. This refinement in functioning is to be achieved by a fresh hyper-cathexis, effected with the help of consciousness. But we
are aware that this refinement is seldom successful, even in normal psychic life, and that our thinking always remains liable to falsification by the
intervention of the pain-principle. 
This, however, is not the breach in the functional efficiency of our psychic apparatus which makes it possible for thoughts representing the result
of the secondary thought-work to fall into the power of the primary psychic process; by which formula we may now describe the operations
resulting in dreams and the symptoms of hysteria. This inadequacy results from the converging of two factors in our development, one of which
pertains solely to the psychic apparatus, and has exercised a determining influence on the relation of the two systems, while the other operates
fluctuatingly, and introduces motive forces of organic origin into the psychic life. Both originate in the infantile life, and are a precipitate of the
alteration which our psychic and somatic organism has undergone since our infantile years.
When I termed one of the psychic processes in the psychic apparatus the primary process, I did so not only in consideration of its status and
function, but was also able to take account of the temporal relationship actually involved. So far as we know, a psychic apparatus possessing only
the primary process does not exist, and is to that extent a theoretical fiction but this at least is a fact: that the primary processes are present in the
apparatus from the beginning, while the secondary processes only take shape gradually during the course of life, inhibiting and overlaying the
primary, whilst gaining complete control over them perhaps only in the prime of life. Owing to this belated arrival of the secondary processes, the
essence of our being, consisting of unconscious wish-impulses, remains something which cannot be grasped or inhibited by the preconscious; and
its part is once and for all restricted to indicating the most appropriate paths for the wish-impulses originating in the unconscious. These
unconscious wishes represent for all subsequent psychic strivings a compulsion to which they Must submit themselves, although they may
perhaps endeavour to divert them and to guide them to superior aims. In consequence of this retardation, an extensive region of the memorymaterial remains in fact inaccessible to preconscious cathexis.
Now among these wish-impulses originating in the infantile life. indestructible and incapable of inhibition, there are some the fulfilments of
which have come to be in contradiction with the purposive ideas of our secondary thinking. The fulfilment of these wishes would no longer
produce an affect of pleasure, but one of pain; and it is just this conversion of affect that constitutes the essence of what we call repression. In
what manner and by what motive forces such a conversion can take place constitutes the problem of repression, which we need here only to touch
upon in passing. It will suffice to note the fact that such a conversion of affect occurs in the course of development (one need only think of the
emergence of disgust, originally absent in infantile life), and that it is connected with the activity of the secondary system. The memories from
which the unconscious wish evokes a liberation of affect have never been accessible to the Pcs, and for that reason this liberation cannot be
inhibited. It is precisely on account of this generation of affect that these ideas are not now accessible even by way of the preconscious thoughts
to which they have transferred the energy of the wishes connected with them. On the contrary, the pain-principle comes into play, and causes the
Pcs to turn away from these transference-thoughts. These latter are left to themselves, are repressed, and thus, the existence of a store of infantile
memories, withdrawn from the beginning from the Pcs, becomes the preliminary condition of repression.
In the most favourable case, the generation of pain terminates so soon as the cathexis is withdrawn from the transference-thoughts in the Pcs, and
this result shows that the intervention of the pain-principle is appropriate. It is otherwise, however, if the repressed unconscious wish receives an
organic reinforcement which it can put at the service of its transference-thoughts, and by which it can enable them to attempt to break through
with their excitation, even if the cathexis of the Pcs has been taken away from them. A defensive struggle then ensues, inasmuch as the Pcs
reinforces the opposite to the repressed thoughts (counter-cathexis), and the eventual outcome is that the transference-thoughts (the carriers of the
unconscious wish) break through in some form of compromise through symptom-formation. But from the moment that the repressed thoughts are
powerfully cathected by the unconscious wish-impulse, but forsaken by the preconscious cathexis, they succumb to the primary psychic process,
and aim only at motor discharge; or, if the way is clear, at hallucinatory revival of the desired identity of perception. We have already found,
empirically, that the incorrect processes described are enacted only with thoughts which are in a state of repression. We are now in a position to
grasp yet another part of the total scheme of the facts. These incorrect Processes are the primary processes of the psychic apparatus; they occur
wherever ideas abandoned by the preconscious cathexis are left to themselves and can become filled with the uninhibited energy which flows
from the unconscious and strives for discharge. There are further facts which go to show that the processes described as incorrect are not really
falsifications of our normal procedure, or defective thinking. but the modes of operation of the psychic apparatus when freed from inhibition.
Thus we see that the process of the conveyance of the preconscious excitation to motility occurs in accordance with the same procedure, and that
in the linkage of preconscious ideas with words we may easily find manifested the same displacements and confusions (which we ascribe to
inattention). Finally, a proof of the increased work made necessary by the inhibition of these primary modes of procedure might be found in the
fact that we achieve a comical effect, a surplus to be discharged through laughter, if we allow these modes of thought to come to consciousness.
The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts with absolute certainty that it can only be sexual wish-impulses from the infantile life, which have
undergone repression (affect-conversion) during the developmental period of childhood, which are capable of renewal at later periods of
development (whether as a result of our sexual constitution, which has, of course, grown out of an original bi-sexuality, or in consequence of
unfavourable influences in our sexual life); and which therefore supply the motive-power for all psychoneurotic symptom-formation. It is only by
the introduction of these sexual forces that the gaps still demonstrable in the theory of repression can be filled. Here, I will leave it undecided
whether the postulate of the sexual and infantile holds good for the theory of dreams as well; I am not completing the latter, because in assuming
that the dream-wish invariably originates in the unconscious I have already gone a step beyond the demonstrable.[42] Nor will I inquire further
into the nature of the difference between the play of psychic forces in dream-formation and in the formation of hysterical symptoms, since there is
missing here the needed fuller knowledge of one of the two things to be compared. But there is another point which I regard as important, and I
will confess at once that it was only on account of this point that I entered upon all the discussions concerning the two psychic systems, their
modes of operation, and the fact of repression. It does not greatly matter whether I have conceived the psychological relations at issue with
approximate correctness, or, as is easily possible in such a difficult matter, wrongly and imperfectly. However our views may change about the 
interpretation of the psychic censorship or the correct and the abnormal elaboration of the dream-content. it remains certain that such processes
are active in dream-formation, and that in their essentials they reveal the closest analogy with the processes observed in the formation of
hysterical symptoms. Now the dream is not a pathological phenomenon; it does not presuppose any disturbance of our psychic equilibrium; and it
does not leave behind it any weakening of our efficiency or capacities. The objection that no conclusions can be drawn about the dreams of
healthy persons from my own dreams and from those of my neurotic patients may be rejected without comment. If, then, from the nature of the
given phenomena we infer the nature of their motive forces, we find that the psychic mechanism utilized by the neuroses is not newly-created by
a morbid disturbance that lays hold of the psychic life, but lies in readiness in the normal structure of our psychic apparatus. The two psychic
systems, the frontier-censorship between them, the inhibition and overlaying of the one activity by the other, the relations of both to
consciousness - or whatever may take place of these concepts on a juster interpretation of the actual relations - all these belong to the normal
structure of our psychic instrument, and the dream shows us one of the paths which lead to a knowledge of this structure. If we wish to be content
with a minimum of perfectly assured additions to our knowledge, we shall say that the dream affords proof that the suppressed material continues
to exist even in the normal person and remains capable of psychic activity. Dreams are one of the manifestations of this suppressed material;
theoretically, this is true in all cases; and in tangible experience, it has been found true in at least a great number of cases, which happen to displaymost plainly the more striking features of the dream-life. The suppressed psychic material, which in the waking state has been prevented from
expression and cut off from internal perception by the mutual neutralization of contradictory attitudes, finds ways and means, under the sway of
compromise-formations, of obtruding itself on consciousness during the night.
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. [43] At any rate, the interpretation of dreams is the via regia to a knowledge of the unconscious
element in our psychic life.
By the analysis of dreams we obtain some insight into the composition of this most marvellous and most mysterious of instruments; it is true that
this only takes us a little way, but it gives us a start which enables us, setting out from the angle of other (properly pathological) formations, to
penetrate further in our disjoining of the instrument. For disease - at all events that which is rightly called functional - does not necessarily
presuppose the destruction of this apparatus, or the establishment of new cleavages in its interior: it can be explained dynamically by the
strengthening and weakening of the components of the play of forces, so many of the activities of which are covered up in normal functioning. It
might be shown elsewhere how the fact that the apparatus is a combination of two instances also permits of a refinement of its normal functioning
which would have been impossible to a single system. [44]

If we look more closely, we may observe that the psychological considerations examined in the foregoing chapter require us to assume, not the
existence of two systems near the motor end of the psychic apparatus, but two kinds of processes or courses taken by excitation. But this does not
disturb us; for we must always be ready to drop our auxiliary ideas, when we think we are in a position to replace them by something which
comes closer to the unknown reality. Let us now try to correct certain views which may have taken a misconceived form as long as we regarded
the two systems, in the crudest and most obvious sense, as two localities within the psychic apparatus - views which have left a precipitate in the
terms repression and penetration. Thus, when we say that an unconscious thought strives for translation into the preconscious in order
subsequently to penetrate through to consciousness, we do not mean that a second idea has to be formed, in a new locality, like a paraphrase, as it
were, whilst the original persists by its side; and similarly, when we speak of penetration into consciousness, we wish carefully to detach from
this notion any idea of a change of locality. When we say that a preconscious idea is repressed and subsequently absorbed by the unconscious, we
might be tempted by these images, borrowed from the idea of a struggle for a particular territory, to assume that an arrangement is really broken
up in the one psychic locality and replaced by a new one in the other locality. For these comparisons we will substitute a description which would
seem to correspond more closely to the real state of affairs; we will say that an energic cathexis is shifted to or withdrawn from a certain
arrangement, so that the psychic formation falls under the domination of a given instance or is withdrawn from it. Here again we replace a
topographical mode of representation by a dynamic one; it is not the psychic formation that appears to us as the mobile element, but its
innervation.[45]
Nevertheless, I think it expedient and justifiable to continue to use the illustrative idea of the two systems. We shall avoid any abuse of this mode
of representation if we remember that ideas, thoughts, and psychic formations in general must not in any case be localized in organic elements of
the nervous system but, so to speak, between them, where resistances and association-tracks form the correlate corresponding to them. Everything
that can become an object of internal perception is virtual, like the image in the telescope produced by the crossing of light-rays. But we are
justified in thinking of the systems - which have nothing psychic in themselves, and which never become accessible to our psychic perception - as
something similar to the lenses of the telescope, which project the image. If we continue this comparison, we might say that the censorship
between the two systems corresponds to the refraction of rays on passing into a new medium.
Thus far, we have developed our psychology on our own responsibility; it is now time to turn and look at the doctrines prevailing in modern
psychology, and to examine the relation of these to our theories. The problem of the unconscious in psychology is, according to the forcible
statement of Lipps,[46] less a psychological problem than the problem of psychology. As long as psychology disposed of this problem by the
verbal explanation that the psychic is the conscious, and that unconscious psychic occurrences are an obvious contradiction, there was no
possibility of a physician's observations of abnormal mental states being turned to any psychological account. The physician and the philosopher 
can meet only when both acknowledge that unconscious psychic processes is the appropriate and justified expression for all established fact. The
physician cannot but reject, with a shrug of his shoulders, the assertion that consciousness is the indispensable quality of the psychic; if his
respect for the utterances of the philosophers is still great enough, he may perhaps assume that he and they do not deal with the same thing and do
not pursue the same science. For a single intelligent observation of the psychic life of a neurotic, a single analysis of a dream, must force upon
him the unshakable conviction that the most complicated and the most accurate operations of thought, to which the name of psychic occurrences
can surely not be refused, may take place without arousing consciousness.[47] The physician, it is true, does not learn of these unconscious
processes until they have produced an effect on consciousness which admits of communication or observation. But this effect on consciousness
may show a psychic character which differs completely from the unconscious process, so that internal perception cannot possibly recognize in the
first a substitute for the second. The physician must reserve himself the right to penetrate, by a Process of deduction, from the effect on
consciousness to the unconscious psychic process; he learns in this way that the effect on consciousness is only a remote psychic product of the
unconscious process, and that the latter has not become conscious as such, and has, moreover, existed and operated without in any way betraying
itself to consciousness. -
Du Prel says: "The problem: what is the psyche, manifestly requires a preliminary examination as to whether consciousness and psyche are
identical. But it is just this preliminary question which is answered in the negative by the dream, which shows that the concept of the psyche
extends beyond that of consciousness, much as the gravitational force of a star extends beyond its sphere of luminosity" (Philos. d. Mystik, p. 47).
"It is a truth which cannot be sufficiently emphasized that the concepts of consciousness and of the psyche are not co-extensive" (p. 306).
A return from the over-estimation of the property of consciousness is the indispensable preliminary to any genuine insight into the course of
psychic events. As Lipps has said, the unconscious must be accepted as the general basis of the psychic life. The unconscious is the larger circle
which includes the smaller circle of the conscious; everything conscious has a preliminary unconscious stage, whereas the unconscious can stop
at this stage, and yet claim to be considered a full psychic function. The unconscious is the true psychic reality; in its inner nature it is just as
much unknown to us as the reality of the external world, and it is just as imperfectly communicated to us by the data of consciousness as is the
external world by the reports of our sense-organs.
We get rid of a series of dream-problems which have claimed much attention from earlier writers on the subject when the old antithesis between
conscious life and dream-life is discarded, and the unconscious psychic assigned to its proper place. Thus, many of the achievements which are a
matter for wonder in a dream are now no longer to be attributed to dreaming, but to unconscious thinking, which is active also during the day. If
the dream seems to make play with a symbolical representation of the body, as Scherner has said, we know that this is the work of certain
unconscious phantasies, which are probably under the sway of sexual impulses and find expression not only in dreams, but also in hysterical
phobias and other symptoms. If the dream continues and completes mental work begun during the day, and even brings valuable new ideas to
light, we have only to strip off the dream-disguise from this, as the contribution of the dream-work, and a mark of the assistance of dark powers in
the depths of the psyche (cf. the devil in Tartini's sonata-dream). The intellectual achievement as such belongs to the same psychic forces as are
responsible for all such achievements during the day. We are probably much too inclined to over-estimate the conscious character even of
intellectual and artistic production. From the reports of certain writers who have been highly productive, such as Goethe and Helmholtz, we learn,
rather, that the most essential and original part of their creations came to them in the form of inspirations, and offered itself to their awareness in
an almost completed state. In other cases, where there is a concerted effort of all the psychic forces, there is nothing strange in the fact that
conscious activity, too, lends its aid. But it is the much-abused privilege of conscious activity to hide from us all other activities wherever it
participates.
It hardly seems worth while to take up the historical significance of dreams as a separate theme. Where, for instance, a leader has been impelled
by a dream to engage in a bold undertaking, the success of which has had the effect of changing history, a new problem arises only so long as the
dream is regarded as a mysterious power and contrasted with other more familiar psychic forces. The problem disappears as soon as we regard thedream as a form of expression for impulses to which a resistance was attached during the day, whilst at night they were able to draw
reinforcement from deep-lying sources of excitation.[48] But the great respect with which the ancient peoples regarded dreams is based on a just
piece of psychological divination. It is a homage paid to the unsubdued and indestructible element in the human soul, to the demonic power
which furnishes the dream-wish, and which we have found again in our unconscious.
It is not without purpose that I use the expression in our unconscious, for what we so call does not coincide with the unconscious of the
philosophers, nor with the unconscious of Lipps. As they use the term, it merely means the opposite of the conscious. That there exist not only
conscious but also unconscious psychic processes is the opinion at issue, which is so hotly contested and so energetically defended. Lipps
enunciates the more comprehensive doctrine that everything psychic exists as unconscious, but that some of it may exist also as conscious. But it
is not to prove this doctrine that we have adduced the phenomena of dreams and hysterical symptom-formation; the observation of normal life
alone suffices to establish its correctness beyond a doubt. The novel fact that we have learned from the analysis of psycho-pathological
formations, and indeed from the first member of the group, from dreams, is that the unconscious - and hence all that is psychic - occurs as a
function of two separate systems, and that as such it occurs even in normal psychic life. There are consequently two kinds of unconscious, which
have not as yet been distinguished by psychologists. Both are unconscious in the psychological sense; but in our sense the first, which we call
Ucs, is likewise incapable of consciousness; whereas the second we call Pcs because its excitations, after the observance of certain rules, are
capable of reaching consciousness; perhaps not before they have again undergone censorship, but nevertheless regardless of the Ucs system. The 
fact that in order to attain consciousness the excitations must pass through an unalterable series, a succession of instances, as is betrayed by the
changes produced in them by the censorship, has enabled us to describe them by analogy in spatial terms. We described the relations of the two
systems to each other and to consciousness by saying that the system Pcs is like a screen between the system Ucs and consciousness. The system
Pcs not only bars access to consciousness, but also controls the access to voluntary motility, and has control of the emission of a mobile cathectic
energy, a portion of which is familiar to us as attention.[49]
We must also steer clear of the distinction between the super-conscious and the subconscious, which has found such favour in the more recent
literature on the psychoneuroses, for just such a distinction seems to emphasize the equivalence of what is psychic and what is conscious.
What role is now left, in our representation of things, to the phenomenon of consciousness, once so all-powerful and over-shadowing all else?
None other than that of a sense-organ for the perception of psychic qualities. According to the fundamental idea of our schematic attempt we can
regard conscious perception only as the function proper to a special system for which the abbreviated designation Cs commends itself. This
system we conceive to be similar in its mechanical characteristics to the perception-system P, and hence excitable by qualities, and incapable of
retaining the trace of changes: i.e., devoid of memory. The psychic apparatus which, with the sense-organ of the P-systems, is turned to the outer
world, is itself the outer world for the sense-organ of Cs, whose teleological justification depends on this relationship. We are here once more
confronted with the principle of the succession of instances which seems to dominate the structure of the apparatus. The material of excitation
flows to the sense-organ Cs from two sides: first from the P-system, whose excitation, qualitatively conditioned, probably undergoes a new
elaboration until it attains conscious perception; and, secondly, from the interior of the apparatus itself, whose quantitative processes are
perceived as a qualitative series of pleasures and pains once they have reached consciousness after undergoing certain changes.
The philosophers, who became aware that accurate and highly complicated thought-structures are possible even without the co-operation of
consciousness, thus found it difficult to ascribe any function to consciousness; it appeared to them a superfluous mirroring of the completed
psychic process. The analogy of our Cs system with the perception-systems relieves us of this embarrassment. We see that perception through our
sense-organs results in directing an attention-cathexis to the paths along which the incoming sensory excitation diffuses itself; the qualitative
excitation of the P-system serves the mobile quantity in the psychic apparatus as a regulator of its discharge. We may claim the same function for
the overlying sense-organ of the Cs system. By perceiving new qualities, it furnishes a new contribution for the guidance and suitable distribution
of the mobile cathexis-quantities. By means of perceptions of pleasure and pain, it influences the course of the cathexes within the psychic
apparatus, which otherwise operates unconsciously and by the displacement of quantities. It is probable that the pain-principle first of all regulates
the displacements of cathexis automatically, but it is quite possible that consciousness contributes a second and more subtle regulation of these
qualities, which may even oppose the first, and perfect the functional capacity of the apparatus, by placing it in a position contrary to its original
design, subjecting even that which induces pain to cathexis and to elaboration. We learn from neuro-psychology that an important part in the
functional activity of the apparatus is ascribed to these regulations by the qualitative excitations of the sense-organs. The automatic rule of the
primary pain-principle, together with the limitation of functional capacity bound up with it, is broken by the sensory regulations, which are
themselves again automatisms. We find that repression, which, though originally expedient, nevertheless finally brings about a harmful lack of
inhibition and of psychic control, overtakes memories much more easily than it does perceptions, because in the former there is no additional
cathexis from the excitation of the psychic sense-organs. Whilst an idea which is to be warded off may fail to become conscious because it has
succumbed to repression, it may on other occasions come to be repressed simply because it has been withdrawn from conscious perception on
other grounds. These are clues which we make use of in therapy in order to undo accomplished repressions.
The value of the hyper-cathexis which is produced by the regulating influence of the Cs sense-organs on the mobile quantity is demonstrated in a
teleological context by nothing more clearly than by the creation of a new series of qualities, and consequently a new regulation, which
constitutes the prerogative of man over animals. For the mental processes are in themselves unqualitative except for the excitations of pleasure
and pain which accompany them: which, as we know, must be kept within limits as possible disturbers of thought. In order to endow them with
quality, they are associated in man with verbal memories, the qualitative residues of which suffice to draw upon them the attention of
consciousness, which in turn endows thought with a new mobile cathexis.
It is only on a dissection of hysterical mental processes that the manifold nature of the problems of consciousness becomes apparent. One then
receives the impression that the transition from the preconscious to the conscious cathexis is associated with a censorship similar to that between
Ucs and Pcs. This censorship, too, begins to act only when a certain quantitative limit is reached, so that thought-formations which are not very
intense escape it. All possible cases of detention from consciousness and of penetration into consciousness under certain restrictions are included
within the range of psychoneurotic phenomena; all point to the intimate and twofold connection between the censorship and consciousness. I shall
conclude these psychological considerations with the record of two such occurrences.
On the occasion of a consultation a few years ago, the patient was an intelligent-looking girl with a simple, unaffected manner. She was strangely
attired; for whereas a woman's dress is usually carefully thought out to the last pleat, one of her stockings was hanging down and two of the
buttons of her blouse were undone. She complained of pains in one of her legs, and exposed her calf without being asked to do so. Her chief
complaint, however, was as follows: She had a feeling in her body as though something were sticking into it which moved to and fro and shook
her through and through. This sometimes seemed to make her whole body stiff. On hearing this, my colleague in consultation looked at me: the
trouble was quite obvious to him. To both of us it seemed peculiar that this suggested nothing to the patient's mother, though she herself must
repeatedly have been in the situation described by her child. As for the girl, she had no idea of the import of her words, or she would never have 
allowed them to pass her lips. Here the censorship had been hoodwinked so successfully that under the mask of an innocent complaint a phantasy
was admitted to consciousness which otherwise would have remained in the preconscious.
Another example: I began the psycho-analytic treatment of a boy fourteen who was suffering from tic convulsif, hysterical vomiting, headache,
etc., by assuring him that after closing his eyes he would see pictures or that ideas would occur to him, which he was to communicate to me. He
replied by describing pictures. The last impression he had received before coming to me was revived visually in his memory. He had been playing
a game of checkers with his uncle, and now he saw the checkerboard before him. He commented on various positions that were favourable or
unfavourable, on moves that were not safe to make. He then saw a dagger lying on the checker-board - an object belonging to his father, but
which his phantasy laid on the checker-board. Then a sickle was lying on the board; a scythe was added; and finally, he saw the image of an old
peasant mowing the grass in front of his father's house far away. A few days later I discovered the meaning of this series of pictures. Disagreeable
family circumstances had made the boy excited and nervous. Here was a case of a harsh, irascible father, who had lived unhappily with the boy's
mother, and whose educational methods consisted of threats; he had divorced his gentle and delicate wife, and remarried; one day he brought
home a young woman as the boy's new mother. The illness of the fourteen-year-old boy developed a few days later. It was the suppressed rage
against his father that had combined these images into intelligible allusions. The material was furnished by a mythological reminiscence. The
sickle was that with which Zeus castrated his father; the scythe and the image of the peasant represented Kronos, the violent old man who devours
his children, and upon whom Zeus wreaks his vengeance in so unfilial a manner. The father's marriage gave the boy an opportunity of returning
the reproaches and threats which the child had once heard his father utter because he played with his genitals (the draught-board; the prohibited
moves; the dagger with which one could kill). We have here long-impressed memories and their unconscious derivatives which, under the guise
of meaningless pictures, have slipped into consciousness by the devious paths opened to them.
If I were asked what is the theoretical value of the study of dreams, I should reply that it lies in the additions to psychological knowledge and the
beginnings of an understanding of the neuroses which we thereby obtain. Who can foresee the importance a thorough knowledge of the structure
and functions of the psychic apparatus may attain, when even our present state of knowledge permits of successful therapeutic intervention in the
curable forms of psychoneuroses? But, it may be asked, what of the practical value of this study in regard to a knowledge of the psyche and
discovery of the hidden peculiarities of individual character? Have not the unconscious impulses revealed by dreams the value of real forces in
the psychic life? Is the ethical significance of the suppressed wishes to be lightly disregarded, since, just as they now create dreams, they may
some day create other things?
I do not feel justified in answering these questions. I have not followed up this aspect of the problem of dreams. In any case, however, I believe
that the Roman Emperor was in the wrong in ordering one of his subjects to be executed because the latter had dreamt that he had killed the
Emperor. He should first of all have endeavoured to discover the significance of the man's dreams; most probably it was not what it seemed to be.
And even if a dream of a different content had actually had this treasonable meaning, it would still have been well to recall the words of Plato -
that the virtuous man contents himself with dreaming of that which the wicked man does in actual life. I am therefore of the opinion that dreams
should be acquitted of evil. Whether any reality is to be attributed to the unconscious wishes, I cannot say. Reality must, of course, be denied to
all transitory and intermediate thoughts. If we had before us the unconscious wishes, brought to their final and truest expression, we should still
do well to remember that psychic reality is a special form of existence which must not be confounded with material reality. It seems, therefore,
unnecessary that people should refuse to accept the responsibility for the immorality of their dreams. With an appreciation of the mode of
functioning of the psychic apparatus, and an insight into the relations between conscious and unconscious, all that is ethically offensive in our
dream-life and the life of phantasy for the most part disappears.
"What a dream has told us of our relations to the present (reality) we will then seek also in our consciousness and we must not be surprised if we
discover that the monster we saw under the magnifying-glass of the analysis is a tiny little infusorian" (H. Sachs).
For all practical purposes in judging human character, a man's actions and conscious expressions of thought are in most cases sufficient. Actions,
above all, deserve to be placed in the front rank; for many impulses which penetrate into consciousness are neutralized by real forces in the
psychic life before they find issue in action; indeed, the reason why they frequently do not encounter any psychic obstacle on their path is because
the unconscious is certain of their meeting with resistances later. In any case, it is highly instructive to learn something of the intensively tilled
soil from which our virtues proudly emerge. For the complexity of human character, dynamically moved in all directions, very rarely
accommodates itself to the arbitrament of a simple alternative, as our antiquated moral philosophy would have it.
And what of the value of dreams in regard to our knowledge of the future? That, of course, is quite out of the question. One would like to
substitute the words: in regard to our knowledge of the past. For in every sense a dream has its origin in the past. The ancient belief that dreams
reveal the future is not indeed entirely devoid of the truth. By representing a wish as fulfilled the dream certainly leads us into the future; but this
future, which the dreamer accepts as his present, has been shaped in the likeness of the past by the indestructible wish. 






















